Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on
23 January, 2025

Bench: Prathiba M. Singh, Amit Sharma

$~31
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
Date of Decision: 23rd January, 2025
+ CONT.CAS. (CRL) 13/2024
COURT ON ITS OWN MOTION .....Petitioner
Through: Mr. Rajiv Nayar, Sr. Adv, Mr. Dayan
Krishnan Sr. Adv, Mr. Maninder
Singh, Sr. Adv, Mr. Rishi Agrawala,
Mr. Rahul Malhotra, Ms. Devika
Mohan, Mr. Ankit Banati, Mr.
Abhishek Anand, Ms. Manavi
Agarwal, Ms. Kashish Mathur, Ms.
Minal Kaushik, Ms. Sanjana Nair and
Mr. Rishu Kant Sharma, Advocates
for Vijay Srivastava.
versus
ROOP DARSHAN PANDEY AND ORS. .....Respondents
Through: Mr. Roop Darshan Pandey in person.
Ms. Anjali Sisodia for Ms. Neha Jain.
Mr. Deepak Dahiya, Advocate.
Mr. Atul Krishna, Journalist alongwith
Mr. Advait Ghosh, Advocate for The
New Indian.
CORAM:
JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
JUSTICE AMIT SHARMA
Prathiba M. Singh, J. (Oral)

1. This hearing has been done through hybrid mode. Background

2. The present contempt reference arises out of the order dated 28th October, 2024 passed by a ld.
Single Judge of this Court in CRL.M.C. 5587/2024 titled as Vijay Srivastava & Anr. v. State NCT of
Delhi & Anr. The said CRL.M.C. was filed by Shri Vijay Srivastava and Hero Moto Corp.

Ltd. challenging the order dated 19th July, 2023 passed in Complaint Case No.187/2024 wherein
the ld. Judicial Magistrate directed registration of FIR against the Petitioner. The said complaint
was filed on 21st July, 2024, by the contemnor Shri Roop Darshan Pandey, who was a director of
Brain Logistics Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred as 'BLPL').

Dispute between BLPL/Roop Darshan Pandey with Hero Moto Corp. Ltd.

3. The dispute between the contesting parties emanated out of a jobs contract dated 1st October,
2001 signed with BLPL, for providing manpower services at the spare parts division of the Petitioner

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

company, which at the relevant point of time was referred as Hero Honda Motors Ltd. ('HHML')
and now known as Hero MotoCorp Ltd. (hereinafter referred as 'HML'). The said contract was
terminated on 30th March, 2010, on account of relations turning sore between the parties. The said
agreement dated 1st December, 2005 contained an arbitration clause 24. The same was invoked by
BLPL, by issuing notice dated 27th April, 2010. The Petitioner also changed their name from Hero
Honda Motors Ltd. to Hero MotoCorp Ltd sometime in the year 2011.

4. Late Hon'ble Justice H.S. Bedi (Retd.) of the Supreme Court was appointed as the Sole Arbitrator
for adjudication of the disputes between the parties on 27th April, 2012. The ld. Sole Arbitrator had
rendered the award dated 20th May, 2018, which has been challenged before the Punjab & Haryana
High Court. Vide the said arbitral award ld. Arbitrator awarded to BLPL, a sum of Rs.70,00,000/-
towards short payments and interest @6% p.a. from April, 2010+Rs.1,25,000/- service charge along
with interest @6% p.a. from March, 2010.

5. This contractual dispute, however, has unfolded into a plethora of criminal cases between the
parties. Various allegations were raised by BLPL against HML and its officials. Various FIRs were
sought to be registered raising allegations related to certain documents and certain PF issues. One
such criminal complaint filed by BLPL against the company is Complaint Case No.187/2024. In the
said case, vide order dated 19th July, 2024, the ld. Magistrate, Karkardooma Court directed
registration of FIR within three days. The said order was passed on Friday and the FIR was to be
registered on Monday i.e., on 22nd July, 2024.

6. The company HML and one of its officials filed a petition for quashing being CRL.M.C.5587/2024
before this Court. In view of the urgency that an FIR would be registered in three days, the petition
was sought to be mentioned for urgent listing by counsel for the Petitioners. Advance intimation of
the same was given by an email on 22nd July, 2024 itself in the morning that the matter would be
mentioned. Considering the advocate on record in the matter, the matter could not have been
mentioned before the extant DB-I and the mentioning is stated to have been done before DB-II.
Once mentioning was done, the Court (DB-II) had allowed the listing of the matter on the same day
subject to office objections.

7. On 22nd July, 2024, notice was issued in CRL.M.C.5587/2024 and an interim order was also
passed by which the order of the ld. Magistrate dated 19th July, 2023 was stayed. The relevant
portion of the order has been extracted below:

"1. Matter has been listed by way of the 'Supplementary List' and has been taken up
in the post lunch session.

2. By way of present petition, the petitioners seek quashing and setting aside of the
order dated 19.07.2024 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate, Karkardooma
Courts, Delhi in Complaint Case 187/2024 titled as 'Brains Logistics Pvt. Ltd. v. Vijay
Srivastav and Ors.' whereby a direction has been given to register an FIR in
p u r s u a n c e o f a n a p p l i c a t i o n f i l e d u n d e r S e c t i o n 1 5 6 ( 3 ) C r . P . C . b y t h e
complainant/respondent No.2.

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

3. Learned Senior Counsels for the petitioners contend that the dispute pertains to an
underlying Job Contract Agreement and a Supplementary Job Agreement both dated
01.10.2001 executed between the parties initially for a period of two years.
Subsequently, in the year 2010, on account of relations turning sore between the
parties, the Agreements were terminated, resulting in arbitration proceedings and
passing of the arbitral award. It is next contended that the application filed by the
complainant under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. pertains to fabrication, and forgery of the
PF challans concerning which, the present petitioners had already lodged an FIR
No.842/2013 under Sections 120- B/418/420/467/468/471 IPC at P.S. Gurugram
against the respondent/complainant in which the charges were framed against the
complainant and its Director on 27.03.2018. Further, a challenge to the FIR by the
complainant vide CRM-M No.25759 of 2021 was dismissed by the Punjab & Haryana
High Court at Chandigarh vide order dated 03.12.2021. A challenge to the same, vide
SLP (Crl) No. 808 of 2022 also came to be dismissed by the Supreme Court on
07.02.2022.

4 . I t i s a l s o s t a t e d t h a t F I R N o . 3 0 3 / 2 0 2 3 r e g i s t e r e d u n d e r S e c t i o n s
463/467/468/471/34/477A/120B/406 IPC at P.S. Vasant Kunj North was filed by
the complainant against the petitioners and its Director which has been stayed by this
Court vide order dated 12.10.2023 passed in CRL.M.C.7480/2023. Further, the
complainant has also lodged another case being FIR No.6/2013 at P.S. Shakarpur,
Delhi alleging fabrication of wages register of workmen, misappropriation of wages,
fabrication of PF challans in which a closure report has been filed twice by the police.

5. On the strength of above facts, learned Senior Counsels contend that the impugned
order has been passed without due application of mind with respect to an application
alleging same set of allegations concerning of forging, manufacturing PF challans.
The complaint is not only motivated but also highly belated.

6. Issue notice.

7. Learned APP for the State accepts notice.

8. Let the notice be also issued to respondent No.2 by all permissible modes,
returnable on 30.09.2024.

9. In the meantime, the directions contained in the impugned order for registration
of FIR shall remain stayed, if not already acted upon."

The passing of the stay order is stated to have been intimated by HML's counsel to the Respondents
on 22nd July, 2024 itself by two emails, one around 4.45 pm and the second email after 8 pm, when
the copy of the order was received by ld. Counsel.

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

8. In respect of the said petition, various attempts were made by the Respondents raised baseless
allegations against the Petitioner. Vide email dated 18th September, 2024 a legal notice was then
served upon HML by a law firm called M/s. CPS Legal from its email address info@cfslegal.in. In
the said notice, which is undated, various allegations were made by the said law firm representing
BLPL to the following effect:

(i) That HML was indulging in forum shopping;

(ii) That the mentioning before DB-II was in defiance of the Roster as mentioning
could only be done before the DB-I;

(iii) That allowing the petition to be listed subject to office objections means that all
objections were to be cleared but various objections were, in fact, not cleared;

(iv) Allegations were made against the Registry that it was manipulated;

(v) That the Registry ignored the endorsement made by DB-II at the time of
mentioning and the case was listed as it is which was contrary to the noting which
allowed the listing, subject to the office objections;

(vi) That false declaration was made by HML due to which the Registry generated the
supplementary cause list thereby listing the matter in Court No.30 on 22nd July,
2024;

(vii) That an email was sent on behalf of HML at 4:48 p.m. whereas the order was
uploaded by the Court only at 8:10 p.m.;

9. A perusal of the notice reveals that the notice is undated and is attached to an email dated 18th
September, 2024. It does not give the name of the lawyer who has signed the notice. The names of
the lawyers who were part of the firm are not reflected on the letter head. The bar council
registration numbers of the lawyers are also not mentioned. The e-mail and the attachment are
extracted here for perusal:

The legal notice itself is relevant and is extracted below:

10. The notice reveals that allegations were made regarding the mentioning of the matter and the
Registry's clearing of defects and the listing of the matter. Having perused this notice, on 3rd
October, 2024, an application was then filed by HML seeking to place on record the said email dated
18th September, 2024 along with the notice. The said application was listed on 23 rd September,
2024 and was thereafter taken up by the Court on 3rd October, 2024. On the said date, the Court
noticed that Mr. Roop Darshan Pandey has signed every page of the notice. It was also argued that
the notice is contemptuous against the High Court and casts aspersions on the Registry. The said
notice was also published on the online news media platform 'The New Indian' authored by Mr. Atul
Krishna on 23rd September, 2024 on the 'X' handle (previously known as 'Twitter') of 'The New

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

Indian'. It was urged on behalf of the Company that the publication of this legal notice was also an
attempt to scandalize the Court. The Court on the said date came to the prima facie conclusion that
the allegations were malicious and contemptuous. The observations of the Court are as under:

"16. This Court has perused the contents made in the undated legal notice. During the
course of proceedings, the learned senior counsel for the applicant/petitioner no. 2
handed over a copy of a news article dated 23rd September, 2024 published by one
Mr. Atul Krishna on an online news media platform namely "The New Indian". He
also handed over a copy of the post published on the handle of "The New Indian" on
"X"

(formerly known as Twitter). The said documents are taken on record.

17. Upon perusal of the contents of the above said notice, as well as the contents of the news article
dated 23rd September, 2024 and post made on "X" (formerly known as Twitter), it is made out that
prima facie the same contains malicious and contemptuous allegations which not only seek to
scandalise, interfere with the administration of justice, but also makes false assertions, cast
aspersions on the entire institution and the Registry of the High Court, and therefore, lower the
dignity and authority of the High Court. In light of the same, this Court is of the view that the
contents made in the said notice makes serious allegations against the Registry of the High Court by
stating that the petitioner has allegedly manipulated the Registry of the High Court by tactics and
misrepresentation.

18. It is observed by this Court that the nonapplicant/respondent no. 2 in the said legal notice stated that the Predecessor Bench, in its order
dated 22nd July, 2024, has "presumed" certain facts while passing the directions in the said order.
This Court is shocked at the conduct of the respondent no. 2, whereby, it has alleged that the Court
has passed the directions in the said order on the basis of presumptions and the same amounts to
making of contemptuous remarks against the High Court and the entire institution."

11. Notice was issued to 'The New Indian' and 'X' platform. Thereafter on 28th October, 2024, the
Court after hearing parties observed that the aforesaid act of Respondent No.2-Brain Logistics Pvt.
Ltd. is contemptuous and malicious in intention and therefore action for criminal contempt be
initiated against the Respondent No.2 , The New Indian and its correspondent, Mr. Atul Krishnan.
The relevant portion of the said order is as under:

"9. Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances and material placed on record,
this Court is prima facie satisfied that acts committed by respondent no.2 of issuing a
legal notice though the counsel which contains certain allegations which tend to not
only scandalize and interfere with the administration of justice, but also make false
assertions, cast aspersions on the Delhi High Court, and also lowers the dignity and
authority of the entire institution, ultimately affecting the judicial system. Issuing of
legal notice containing baseless allegations against the High Court and making it

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

available in the public domain is an instance of misconduct, thereby, prima facie
amounting to contempt of Court.

10. In light of the aforesaid discussions, this Court is of the considered view that the
aforesaid act of the respondent no. 2 carries contemptuous/malicious intention in
terms of Section 15 (3) of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 and Article 215 of the
Constitution of India, and therefore, criminal contempt proceedings is liable to be
initiated against the respondent no. 2.

11. Accordingly, subject to orders of Hon'ble the Chief Justice, list before the Division
Bench on 5th November, 2024 to initiate criminal contempt proceedings against the
respondent no. 2, 'The New Indian' and Mr. Atul Krishna."

12. The present matter i.e., CONT. CAS. (CRL.)13/2024 was then listed before this Bench on 5th
November, 2024 and after considering the matter as also the fact that the dispute was primarily a
contractual dispute, the matter was sent to mediation on 6th November, 2024. The relevant
paragraphs of the said order are listed below:

"7. The Court has also considered the matter and it is clear that the entire dispute
arises out of one Jobs Contract dated 1st October 2001, which was entered between
the firm Respondent No. 2-Brains Logistics Private Limited through its Director Mr.
Roop Darshan Pandey and the company Hero MotoCorp Limited/ Hero Group. The
said contract was terminated by the Petitioner No. 2-Hero Motocorp Ltd. on 30th
March, 2010, which resulted in an arbitral award dated 20th May, 2018, passed by ld.
Tribunal consisting of a retired Supreme Court judge. Challenge in respect of the said
award under Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is stated to be
pending before the Punjab and Haryana High Court being FAO(CARB) No.12/2019.

8. Be that as it may, since these criminal disputes and cases have arisen out of one
contractual dispute, Mr. Nayar, ld. Sr. Counsel on instructions and Mr. Dahiya, ld.
Counsel on instructions from Mr. Roop Darshan Pandey, who is present in Court
submit that parties are willing to explore negotiation and try an amicable resolution
on the disputes.

9. Accordingly, Mr. J.P. Sengh, ld. Sr. counsel [M:9810034286] and Mediator is
appointed as a Mediator in this matter. The ld. Mediator shall hold mediation
sessions and shall submit a report by 2:30 p.m. tomorrow.

10. In the mediation proceedings, two persons from each side shall participate. On
behalf of the Respondents-Mr. Deepak Dahiya, Advocate along with Mr. Roop
Darshan Pandey shall participate. On behalf of the Petitioner-Mr. Rishi Agrawala,
Advocate and Mr. Vijay Srivastava, competent official from the Petitioner company
shall participate."

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

13. On 7th November, 2024, after considering the fact that unnecessary allegations were made in the
legal notice, the Court directed the counsels to file an appropriate affidavit explaining their
understanding of the terms "subject to office objections". On the said date, Mr. Roop Darshan
Pandey also informed the Court that the allegations of forum shopping were made by him in the
legal notice on the advice of his two Counsels - Mr. Deepak Dahiya and Mr. Mohit Yadav. In view of
the same, the Court directed as under:

"4. Further, in pursuance to the direction issued by the Court yesterday in the present
matter, Mr. Mohit Yadav, Advocate who had addressed the legal notice along with
e-mail dated 18th September, 2024 is present today. He tenders an apology to the
Court.

5. The language in the legal notice compels this Court to direct Mr. Dahiya and Mr.
Yadav to file an affidavit explaining the meaning of the terms "subject to office
objections", qua which in the legal notice allegations have been made against the
Registry of this Court as well.

6. Mr. Dayan Krishnan, learned Senior Advocate has further pointed out the
allegations made in the said legal notice in paragraph nos. 3 and 4. Petitioner no.1Mr. Roop Darshan Pandey, who is present in Court states upon being queried as to
how he acquired knowledge of the Roster and why he made allegations of forum
shopping, he states that he consulted with the lawyers Mr. Dahiya and Mr. Yadav. Let
both the Counsels file an affidavit in this regard.

7. In addition, Mr. Dahiya and Mr. Yadav shall also state in their affidavit as to what
are the compliances that have been undertaken in view of yesterday's order, which
require the full name, the Bar Council registration number, website details etc. to be
mentioned in every notice. Let the said affidavit be filed by Monday i.e., 11th
November, 2024.

8. Parties shall bring a list of all the proceedings pending between them on the next
date of hearing."

14. As can be seen from the above, the Counsels were directed to file affidavits and the list of all the
litigations pending between the parties. On 17th December, 2024, arguments were heard. As per the
said order, Mr. Mohit Yadav and Mr. Deepak Dahiya had both filed affidavits. Mr. Roop Darshan
Pandey had also filed an affidavit. He however did not engage any counsel to represent him. After
hearing the arguments on behalf of the HML, the two lawyers and Mr. Pandey himself, the hearing
was concluded and the matter was listed for orders.

Submissions

15. The submissions on behalf of HML is as under:

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

i. Mr. Pandey has abused the process of the Courts repeatedly. He has converted a
contractual dispute into multiple criminal cases. ii. It is highlighted that both the
matters arise out of the same contract and the same arbitration proceedings. The
allegations are also similar, i.e., use of Hero MotoCorp Limited seal for attesting the
true copy of documents which were belonging to Hero Honda Motors Limited, the
predecessor in the interest company. The use of the said seal is stated to be only due
to a name change which took place and all the allegations in the criminal complaint
being filed are on the basis of the said true copy attestation.

iii. Mr. Dayan Krishnan, ld. Counsel also points out that even recently another notice
has been issued by Mr. Pandey on 15 th December, 2024 to the entire board of
directors of HML, making allegations of forgery of the Board Resolution. In this
manner, Mr. Pandey continues to harass the company as also all its officials.

iv. The ld. Senior Counsel has also brought to the notice of the Court, the order of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court dated 11th September, 2024, which again notes all
the proceedings which are pending and the manner in which multiple applications,
petitions, criminal complaints are being filed against the company and its officials.
The observations in the said order are referred to.

v. It is further submitted that the entire attempt of Mr. Pandey is to merely extort a
substantial sum of money. Though, the company is willing to pay the amount as per
the Arbitral award along with the interest, he is unwilling to take the same and is
subjecting the company and its officials to continuous harassment in this manner.

16. Mr. Deepak Dahiya submits that he has not issued the notice and that he is not a part of CPS
Legal. It is submitted that the notice was signed by Mr. Mohit Yadav, though, his name does not
appear in the legal notice. Mr. Dahiya submitted that from the signature, it can be deciphered that
Mr. Yadav has signed the legal notice. Mr. Dahiya submits that the unconditional apologies have
been submitted both on behalf of himself and Mr. Mohit Yadav and the legal notice which was given
has also been withdrawn.

17. Mr. Pandey himself submits that he has filed his affidavit and he does not wish to say anything
more. He further seeks to defend the email dated 15 th December, 2024 to the Board of Directors on
the ground that since the Board Resolution is forged, the Board of Directors ought to have been
aware of the same.

18. On behalf of New Indian, Mr. Atul Krishnan- the journalist, and Mr. Advait, ld. Counsel submit
that the legal notice was published on the Journalist's Twitter account. On a query from the Court as
to whether any verification relating to the contents was done, Mr. Atul Krishnan submits that except
calling the company, no other steps was taken. He specifically states that no checking and
verification was done from the High Court Registry in respect of allegations in the said legal notice.
He also informs the Court that he does not wish to disclose the source of the legal notice, which he
wished to keep as confidential. Finally, he submits that he unconditionally apologies to the Court

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

and undertakes to be careful in future whenever such publishing is done by him.

Analysis and Conclusions

19. The Court has perused the record. It is seen that Mr. Pandey and his company - BLPL have filed
multifarious cases in various forums including criminal complaints against HML, its directors and
its promoters. The details of the said cases are as under:

20. Coming to the present contempt, even after the contempt reference was made, Mr. Pandey
continued to insist on the allegations that the matter was wrongly entertained for mentioning in
DB-II and has placed on record the Rosters of the Delhi High Court for the relevant period with an
intention to completely scandalize the Court further. There are primarily three allegations made by
BLPL and Mr. Pandey in the legal notice against the Court:

i) That the mentioning could not have been done in DB-II;

ii) That the mentioning was allowed "subject to office objections"

and therefore the Registry ought to have ensured that all objections are cleared and
could not have listed the matter without the clearance of all objections;

iii) That the Registry could not have listed the matter in Court No.30 by presuming
that the matter was connected to CRL.M.C. 5587/2024.

21. In the opinion of this Court, all the three allegations made by Mr. Pandey and BLPL as also his
Counsels, are completely incorrect. Firstly, as per the usual practice in the Delhi High Court
mentioning of all urgent matters is before DB-I. However, owing to the Counsel on record in this
case who has been appearing, and who could not have appeared before DB-I, the matter had to be
mentioned before DB-II. There was nothing wrong in this procedure.

22. Insofar as the expression 'subject to office objections' is concerned, the clear understanding and
practice of the Court is that due to urgency, if there are any objections raised in the scrutiny of the
papers by the Registry, the matter would be listed before the Court "subject to office objections" and
the Court would then pass directions regarding the objections or clearing of the objections in its
order. In effect, therefore, the matter would be listed despite the objections raised by the Registry.
This understanding of "subject to office objections" is known generally to all Counsels and the
Registry of this Court. The Court had directed both the lawyers to file an affidavit explaining this
expression and in response thereto in the affidavit of Mr. Dahiya, it is stated as under:

"2. That vide order dated 07.11.2024, this Hon'ble court was pleased to direct the
deponent to explain the meaning of "subject to office objections", qua which in the
legal notice allegations have been made against the Registry of this Court as well. In
this regard, it is humbly submitted that the meaning of "subject to office objections"
is that any matter filed, can be placed before the Hon'ble court with a condition that

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

the 'office objections', if any, shall be cleared in the due course as per applicable rules,
or as directed by the Hon'ble court before which the matter is listed."

23. Even in the affidavit of Mr. Yadav, it is stated as under:

"2. That vide order dated 07.11.2024, this Hon'ble court was pleased to direct the
deponent to explain the meaning of "subject to office objections", qua which in the
legal notice allegations have been made against the Registry of this Court as well. In
this regard, it is humbly submitted that the meaning of "subject to office objections"
is that any matter filed, can be placed before the Hon'ble court with a condition that
the 'office objections', if any, shall be cleared in the due course as per applicable rules,
or as directed by the Hon'ble court before which the matter is listed."

24. Mr. Pandey has also filed an affidavit as under:

"6. That with great humility and unconditional apology, the deponent submits that at
the time of issuing of subject matter legal notice, it was understood that fresh matter
approved for listing "subject to office objections" and the Ld. Registry has raised
'office objections' then the same are to be cleared in due course of time as per
applicable rules. The Deponent, humbly submits that the 'office objections' to be that
"any fresh matter filed by the litigants / Ld. Counsels on which the Ld. Registry has
raised 'office objections' then the said fresh case can be listed with 'subject to office
objections' mentioned in the cause list for further directions by the Hon'ble Court
before which the matter is listed and the 'office objections' are to be cleared by the by
the litigants / Ld. Counsels in the due course as per applicable rules". It is humbly
submitted that the deponent has / had no intent to make any allegations against the
Ld. Registry of this Hon'ble Court or this Hon'ble Court. However, the Deponent
sincerely tenders bona fide, unconditional apology before this Hon'ble Court."

25. In the above affidavits it is clearly admitted by Mr. Pandey as also his counsels that the term
"subject to office objections" means that the matter can be listed before the Court despite the
objections. It is thus clear that the allegation made in the legal notice to the contrary, that all
objections had to be removed prior to listing, was completely false to the knowledge of both the
lawyers and the client. The allegation in the legal notice was clearly to scandalize the Court and the
Registry as also to raise unnecessary doubts as to the functioning of the Court. Moreover, even if the
allegations are not direct, allusions to wrong doing by the Court or the Registry, which is clear from
the legal notice, would also not be permissible.

26. Insofar as the third allegation is concerned i.e., that the two matters were not connected and the
Registry could not have listed the matter before the same Bench which was hearing CRL.M.C.
5587/2024 is concerned, even the said allegation is completely bereft of any merit. On behalf of the
Petitioners, a note has also been filed along with the comparative chart giving the similarities
between the two cases, i.e., CRL.M.Cs. 7840/2023 and 5587/2024. The Court has also perused the
two petitions. A perusal of the same would show:

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

i) That they arise out of the same contractual dispute between the parties i.e., HML
and BLPL;

ii) That the allegation is in respect of certain documents produced by HML;

iii) That the allegation is about putting of a stamp of Hero Moto Corp instead of Hero
Honda Motors Ltd. which is alleged to be a forgery;

iv) In CRL.M.C. 7480/2023, the allegations is in respect of summary sheets for the
year 2009-10 and in CC 187/2024 which is the subject matter of CRL.M.C.
5587/2024. The allegations are in respect of PF Challans for the year 2009-10.

v) The contesting parties in both the matters are the same.

27. The endorsement made by HML that CRL.M.C. 5587/2024 is connected to the pending petition
CRL.M.C. 7480/2023 which is pending before a particular Court, is thus not a wrong statement. It
does not amount to forum shopping. In fact there is a duty cast upon any litigant to inform the
Registry of any dispute between the same parties arising out of the same contract which may be
pending. This is in order to ensure that contradictory orders or multiple litigations are not heard on
similar subject matter by different Courts. This is also expedient in the interest of conservation of
judicial time. The allegations that there was wrong-doing by the Registry is also thus baseless.

28. In Krishna Lal Chawla and Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr., (2021) 5 SCC 435 the Court
emphasised on the importance of judicial time and the responsibility of clients and counsels. The
Court also frowned upon filing of multiple cases relating to the same issue which leads to resource
crunch of the opposing party. The relevant portion of the judgment has been extracted below:

"10. Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees that the right to life and liberty shall not
be taken away except by due process of law. Permitting multiple complaints by the
same party in respect of the same incident, whether it involves a cognizable or private
complaint offence, will lead to the accused being entangled in numerous criminal
proceedings. As such, he would be forced to keep surrendering his liberty and
precious time before the police and the courts, as and when required in each case. As
this Court has held in Amitbhai Anilchandra Shah [Amitbhai Anilchandra Shah v.
CBI, (2013) 6 SCC 348 : (2014) 1 SCC (Cri) 309] , such an absurd and mischievous
interpretation of the provisions of the CrPC will not stand the test of constitutional
scrutiny, and therefore cannot be adopted by us.

xxx

22. Frivolous litigation should not become the order of the day in India. From
misusing the public interest litigation jurisdiction of the Indian courts to abusing the
criminal procedure for harassing their adversaries, the justice delivery system should
not be used as a tool to fulfil personal vendetta. The Indian judiciary has taken

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

cognizance of this issue. In 2014, this Court elucidated as follows, the plight of a
litigant caught in the cobweb of frivolous proceedings in Subrata Roy Sahara v. Union
of India [Subrata Roy Sahara v. Union of India, (2014) 8 SCC 470 : (2014) 4 SCC
(Civ) 424 :

(2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 712] : (SCC p. 642, para 191) "191. ... One needs to keep in mind,
that in the process of litigation, there is an innocent sufferer on the other side, of
every irresponsible and senseless claim. He suffers long drawn anxious periods of
nervousness and restlessness, whilst the litigation is pending, without any fault on his
part.

He pays for the litigation, from out of his savings (or out of his borrowings), worrying that the other
side may trick him into defeat, for no fault of his. He spends invaluable time briefing counsel and
preparing them for his claim. Time which he should have spent at work, or with his family, is lost,
for no fault of his."

While the Court's ruling pertained to civil proceedings, these observations ring true for the criminal
justice machinery as well. We note, with regret, that 7 years hence, and there has still been no
reduction in such plight. A falsely accused person not only suffers monetary damages but is exposed
to disrepute and stigma from society. While running from pillar to post to find a lawyer to represent
his case and arranging finances to defend himself before the court of law, he loses a part of himself."

29. The Court in Buddhi Kota Subbarao v. K. Parasaran, (1996) 5 SCC 530 also observed that
litigants cannot file frivolous petitions to satisfy their whims. The relevant portion of the judgment
reads as under:

"11. The applicant, it appears to us is labouring under grave misconception both of
law and facts and has filed this petition unmindful of the scope of the provisions of
Section 340 CrPC as well as of Sections 191, 192 and 193 IPC. ................

...............The course adopted by the applicant is impermissible and his application is
based on misconception of law and facts. No litigant has a right to unlimited drought
on the court time and public money in order to get his affairs settled in the manner as
he wishes. Easy access to justice should not be misused as a licence to file
misconceived or frivolous petitions. After giving our careful consideration to the
submissions made at the Bar as well as those contained in the memorandum of the
application, we are of the opinion that this application is misconceived, untenable
and has no merits whatsoever. It is accordingly dismissed."

30. Therefore the said endorsement by HML can hardly be termed as forum shopping and the
Registry cannot be blamed in any manner for having listed the matter before the same Bench where
CRL.M.C. 7480/2023 was pending. The allegations against HML and its counsels as also the
Registry was therefore completely baseless. In fact, in the affidavit of Mr. Pandey, he continues to
insist that the two matters are not connected. The relevant paragraph of the affidavit is set out

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

below:

"4. It is respectfully submitted that while the 'advance' service of the above Main
Petition was effected on the deponent through email received at 08:57 AM on
22.07.2024, the 'index' of the said main petition did not mention the para 3 as
follows" 3. The present petition arises out of same dispute from respondent no.2
which is pending adjudication before this hon'ble court in Crl. M.C No.7480 of 2023,
under which the proceedings has been stayed by order dt.12.1 0.2023" and the said
para was only added later on by the Petitioners who knew very well that both said
matters are completely unrelated and are subject matter of different jurisdictions, i.e.
Crl. M.C No. 7480 of 2023 at PS Vasant Kunj (North -Delhi) and Crl. M.C No.5587 of
2024 at Laxmi Nagar (East-Delhi). Further, above referred email of advance service
also mentioned that the said matter will be mentioned before the DB-II of this
Hon'ble Court of Delhi."

31. The language in the legal notice completely scandalises the Court and raises baseless allegations
and aspersions against the administration of justice by the Court by raising doubts about the
functioning of the Registry of this Court. In any case, after issuance of the legal notice, special and
deliberate attempt has been made either by the lawyers or the litigant to get it published in online
platforms. The Journalist - Mr. Atul Krishna who is present has tendered an unconditional apology.
However, the fact remains that the said notice was published on the 'X' (former Twitter) platform of
the media handle. Without any verification of facts, the notice was clearly leaked by Mr.
Pandey/BLPL not only with an intent to cause damage and harm to the reputation of HML but with
a clear intent to also lower the dignity of the Court amongst the public. The habit of releasing
pleadings and documents to the media even before Courts have had the opportunity to consider the
same is also not acceptable as it tends to prejudice the parties and influence independent
decision-making by Courts.

32. While trying to justify the conduct in the affidavit dated 28th November, 2024, Mr. Pandey has
also tendered an apology in the following terms:

"7. It is humbly submitted that, in light of above background, in capacity of the
authorized representative of BLPL, the Deponent has signed the subject matter legal
notice and at my instructions, the said legal notice was sent as an attachment of email
dated on 18.09.2024 'only' to the noticee i.e. HMCL / its directors, to seek their reply.
It is once again humbly submitted that the deponent has / had no intent to make any
allegations against the Ld. Registry of this Hon'ble Court or this Hon'ble Court and
the Deponent sincerely tenders bona fide, unconditional apology before this Hon'ble
Court.

xxx xxx xxx

9. That, the deponent holds this Hon'ble High Court in high regard and esteem and it
was never the intention of the deponent to undermine the majesty of this Hon'ble

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

High Court and he once again tenders unconditional apology."

33. Mr. Atul Krishna has also filed an affidavit tendering an apology in the following terms:

"xxx xxx xxx

4. That I hold this Hon'ble Court in the highest esteem and regard the institution of the judiciary as
the cornerstone of justice, fairness, and democracy.

5. That I submit my unconditional apology for publication or action on my part or on behalf of "New
Indian" that may have been construed as contemptuous or disrespectful to this Hon'ble Court. It is
submitted that in great regard to this Hon'ble Court, the Published contemptuous material has been
immediately taken down from the Platform.

6. That it was never my intention to undermine the authority, dignity, or majesty of this Hon'ble
Court, and I deeply regret any inconvenience or harm caused due to my actions.

7. That I assure this Hon'ble Court that I have taken all necessary steps to rectify the error and
ensure that no such incident occurs in the future. Further, I shall remain vigilant and cautious in the
discharge of my professional duties as a publisher.

8. That I solemnly undertake to exercise the utmost caution and due diligence in the future to
ensure that no such act or omission occurs and that the integrity and dignity of this Hon'ble Court
remain intact at all times.

9. That this unconditional apology is tendered with utmost sincerity, bona fide intention, and
without any reservation whatsoever. I humbly pray for the forgiveness and indulgence of this
Hon'ble Court."

34. Even the counsel - Mr. Dahiya has stated in his affidavit as under:

"3. .....

Therefore, it is the humble understanding of the Deponent that in view of the roster,
all urgent matters will be mentioned only before the DB-1. That once again, it is
humbly submitted that the deponent has / had no intent to make any allegations
against the Registry of this Hon'ble court or this Hon'ble court.

4. That it is submitted that the Deponent has been informed by Mr. Yadav that all
future notices will be issued by his firm, with website details of firm, full name of
advocate and the Bar Council registration number, etc. and as per applicable law."

35. Mr. Yadav, ld. Counsel in his affidavit dated 12th November, 2024 has also stated as under:

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

"3. .....

Therefore, it is the humble understanding of the Deponent that in view of the roster,
all urgent matters will be mentioned only before the DB-1. That once again, it is
humbly submitted that the deponent has / had no intent to make any allegations
against the Registry of this Hon'ble court or this Hon'ble court.

4. That it is submitted that the Deponent shall ensure that all future notices shall be
issued with website detail of firm, full name of advocate and the Bar Council
registration number and as per applicable law."

36. Having heard the parties and having seen the record and also having perused the affidavits filed
on behalf of the Respondents and lawyers and the Journalist, this Court is at pains to observe that
every lawyer and litigant who is before the Court has a responsibility to ensure that any conduct
which lowers the faith in the judicial system ought not to be resorted to. Over the course of various
hearings, it has become clear to the Court that while Mr. Pandey himself has become a habitual
litigant indulging in various practices which would constitute abuse of process, the advice being
given to him by his lawyers is also clearly far from bona fide. Mr. Pandey has categorically made a
statement before the Court that the content of the legal notice were based on the advice given to him
by his lawyers.

37. All three i.e., Mr. Dahiya, Mr. Yadav and Mr. Pandey have admitted that insofar as the term
'subject to office objection' is concerned, they had clearly made a wrong allegation in the notice. This
Court is also clear that insofar as the mentioning before the DB-II and the listing of the matter
before the Bench where CRL.M.Cs. 7840/2023 was pending, there is no irregularity whatsoever.
Even Mr. Atul Krishan had a duty to verify the allegations before bringing the notice in public
domain.

38. Responsible journalism has been emphasised by the Court in In Re:

Harijai Singh and Anr., In Re: Vijay Kumar, (1999) 6 SCC 466 where the Court
observed that not verifying and evaluating the correctness and credibility of the
information being published is an irresponsible conduct and attitude on the part of
editor, publisher and reporter. The relevant portion of the judgment has been
extracted below:

"11. In the present case, as we have noticed above, neither the printer, publisher nor
the editor and reporter took the necessary care in evaluating the correctness and
credibility of the information published by them as the news items in the newspapers
referred to above in respect of an allegation of a very serious nature having great
repercussions causing an embarrassment to this Court. An editor is a person who
controls the selection of the matter which is to be published in a particular issue of
the newspaper. The editor and publisher are liable for illegal and false matter which
is published in their newspaper. Such an irresponsible conduct and attitude on the

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

part of the editor, publisher and the reporter cannot be said to be done in good faith,
but distinctly opposed to the high professional standards as even a slightest enquiry
or a simple verification of the alleged statement about grant of petrol outlets to the
two sons of a Senior Judge of the Supreme Court, out of discretionary quota, which is
found to be patently false would have revealed the truth. But it appears that even the
ordinary care was not resorted to by the contemners in publishing such a false news
items. This cannot be regarded as a public service, but a disservice to the public by
misguiding them with a false news. Obviously, this cannot be regarded as something
done in good faith.

12. But it may be pointed out that various judgments and pronouncements of this
Court bear testimony to the fact that this Court is not hypersensitive in matters
relating to contempt of courts and has always shown magnanimity in accepting the
apology on being satisfied that the error made in the publication was without any
malice or without any intention of disrespect towards the courts or towards any
member of the judiciary. This Court has always entertained fair criticism of the
judgments and orders or about the person of a Judge. Fair criticism within the
parameters of law is always welcome in a democratic system. But the news items with
which we are concerned can neither be said to be fair or made in good faith but
wholly false and the explanation given is far from satisfactory. Shri Hari Jaisingh,
editor of The Sunday Tribune and Lt. Col. H.L. Dheer, publisher as well as Vijay
Kumar Chopra, editor and publisher of daily Punjab Kesari have taken the stand that
they had taken the news items to be correct on the basis of the information supplied
by a very senior journalist of long standing, Dina Nath Misra. But this cannot be
accepted as a valid excuse. It may be stated that at common law, absence of intention
or knowledge about the correctness of the contents of the matter published (for
example as in the present case, on the basis of information received from the
journalist/reporter) will be of no avail for the editors and publishers for contempt of
court but for determining the quantum of punishment which may be awarded. Thus
they cannot escape the responsibility for being careless in publishing it without
caring to verify the correctness. However, since they have not only expressed
repentance on the incident but have expressed their sincere written unconditional
apology, we accept the same with the warning that they should be very careful in
future. As regards the case of Dina Nath Misra, we find he acted in gross carelessness.
Being a very experienced journalist of long standing it was his duty while publishing
the news item relating to the members of the Apex Court, to have taken extra care to
verify the correctness and if he had done so, we are sure there would not have been
any difficulty in coming to know that the information supplied to him had absolutely
no legs to stand and was patently false and the publication would have been avoided
which not only caused great embarrassment to this Court but conveyed a wrong
message to the public at large jeopardizing the faith of the illiterate masses in our
judiciary. Shri Dina Nath Misra has no doubt committed a serious mistake but he has
realised his mistake and expressed sincere repentance and has tendered
unconditional apology for the same. He was present in the Court and virtually looked

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

to be gloomy and felt repentant of what he had done. We think this sufferance itself is
sufficient punishment for him. He being a senior journalist and an aged person and,
therefore, taking a lenient view of the matter, we accept his apology also. We,
however, direct that the contemners will publish in the front page of their respective
newspapers within a box their respective apologies specifically mentioning that the
said news items were absolutely incorrect and false. This may be done within two
weeks. The Contempt Petitions Nos. 206-207 of 1996 are disposed of accordingly.

39. Similarly in Suit (L) No.398/2024 bearing title Khanjan Jagadishkumar Thakkar v. Waahiid Ali
khan & Ors., the Court observed that a journalist or a reporter cannot transgress their limits of right
of speech and expression, without justifying the publication on the basis of its truthfulness. The
relevant portion of the judgment has been extracted below:

"25] As a result of position of Law which has evolved in India, the truth of defamatory
words is a complete defence to an action of libel and slander, but a Journalist or
Reporter is not expected to transgress the limits of his right of speech and expression
and cannot claim protection by simply stating that the information, was provided to
him by someone and it is in public interest to divulge the same, on the pretext that
duty lies in giving out that information to the public. Investigative Journalism
definitely does not enjoy any special protection and the umbrage of public interest
definitely do not permit a publication, which would amount to lowering down the
reputation of any person , in any manner particularly without justifying the
publication on the basis of its truthfulness. Just because, the Defendant No.1 is
interested in ascertaining the truth or is interested in going to roots of the complaint
that is filed, resulting into an FIR, do not necessarily mean that the publication is in
public interest and particularly when the complaint is under investigation."

40. In this background, it deserves to be noted that, after the ld. Single Judge came to a prima facie
conclusion that the notice was contemptuous, the same has been taken down from the online
platforms. The Court after having heard Mr. Atul who was present in Court during all the hearings
also feels that the apology tendered by him is bona fide and therefore the contempt notice against
Mr. Atul Krishna is discharged with the direction that he ought to exercise caution in future and
continue his journalism with a greater sense of responsibility.

41. Insofar as the two Counsels are concerned, both have not merely misadvised their client but have
also expressed least remorse even during the hearings. Their legal notice did not comply with the
required conditions of giving the name of the counsel, the bar council registration number, the date
of the notice, the website, the name of the other lawyers working in the firm, etc., none of it is
mentioned in the legal notice. Such strategies are usually adopted by lawyers in order to insulate
themselves from any action while shooting in the dark and make wild allegations.

42. The Bar Council of India has also prescribed certain rules with respect to the duties of the
Advocates towards the Court and their Client. The said Rules are been extracted below:

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

"Rules on an Advocate's Duty Towards the Court

4. Refuse to act in an illegal manner towards the opposition An advocate should
refuse to act in an illegal or improper manner towards the opposing counsel or the
opposing parties. He shall also use his best efforts to restrain and prevent his client
from acting in any illegal, improper manner or use unfair practices in any mater
towards the judiciary, opposing counsel or the opposing parties.

5. Refuse to represent clients who insist on unfair means An advocate shall refuse to
represent any client who insists on using unfair or improper means. An advocate
shall excise his own judgment in such matters. He shall not blindly follow the
instructions of the client. He shall be dignified in use of his language in
correspondence and during arguments in court. He shall not scandalously damage
the reputation of the parties on false grounds during pleadings. He shall not use
unparliamentary language during arguments in the court."

43. A perusal of the above rules would shows that the Bar Council of India casts responsibility upon
the Advocates to prevent their clients from acting in an illegal manner not only towards judiciary but
also opposing counsel and parties. The counsels in the present case should have advised their clients
with respect to the procedure of listing of cases in Delhi High Court and should not have raised such
baseless allegations, functioning of the Court.

44. During the hearings in the Court also, it was clearly felt that they continued to justify their
conduct rather than express any sense of remorse. The non-reflection of names of counsels, their bar
council registrations is also contrary to the practice directions notified by the Delhi High Court. As
per the Circular No. STBC/Cir/No.18/2006 dated 5th July, 2006, issued by the High Court of Delhi
it has been made compulsory for the Advocates to mention their enrolment number on their letter
heads. The said circular is extracted below:

"It has come to notice that Bar Council of India, in the year 2006, had issued a
Circular No.STBC/Cir/No.18/2006 dated 5.7.2006 to all the State Bar Councils,
communicating its approval to the new Rule 105A, framed by the Bar Council of
Delhi, whereby it was made compulsory for the Advocates to mention enrolment
number on their letter heads and vakalatnamas.

All the Officers and Dealing Assistants of the Filing Counter are requested to ensure
that the Vakalatnamas, filed by the Advocates, must contain their enrolment
numbers as well, in addition to other requirements of the Vakalatnama."

45. The above stated Rule 105 A has been extracted below:

Rule 105A: Every advocate shall mention his/her enrollment number on every visible
representation (wherever the letter "Advocate"/"Attorney"/ "Counsel" is mentioned
after or before the same) including visiting card, letter head, vakalatnama etc.

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

46. A perusal of the above stated rule shows that the enrolment number needs to be mandatorily
added at all places in the letter where "Advocate"/"Attorney"/ "Counsel" is mentioned. It can be
seen that in the present case neither the letterhead mentions the details of the Advocate and the
enrolment number. The same is also not mentioned in the end salutation. It's a prescribed practice
to write the name and enrolment number of the Advocate sending the legal notice to verify the
authenticity of said notice. Moreover, legal notices are made on the letterhead of the concerned
advocate/firm/chamber who is sending the notice and absence of such details questions the validity
of the said notices.

47. The Bombay High Court in Criminal Appeal No. 172/2014 titled Shaikh Farooq v. Shaikh Rafiq
and Ors. also observed that without any signature a typed document in the form of a notice cannot
be considered as a legal notice as nobody would own up to the correctness of its contents.

48. Under these circumstances, both the lawyers have violated the Bar Council Rules and the
practice directions of this Court. This Court is of the opinion that the Counsels have indulged in
unprofessional conduct. The matter is accordingly referred to Bar Council of Delhi for initiating
disciplinary proceedings which shall be decided in accordance with law. In addition, they shall
henceforth comply with the said Rules and modify their letterheads and all other communications in
accordance with the said Rules.

49. Insofar as Mr. Roop Darshan Pandey is concerned, his conduct has been totally defiant even
during Court proceedings. The apology is completely conditional and the intent has been to justify
all the allegations which have been made. The allegations are clearly false to the knowledge of Mr.
Pandey who is a habitual litigant in the Court. The attempt of Mr. Pandey appears to be somehow
continue to harass the company HML, its officials and its Counsels while making wild allegations
against them. Mr. Pandey has also not spared the Court or the Registry of this Court when clearly
there was no fault of the Registry of the Delhi High Court in the clearing of the matter for listing and
also listing of the matter on an urgent basis.

50. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Haridas Das v. Usha Rani Banik (Smt.) and Ors., (2007)14 SCC 1
observed that anyone who tends to tarnish the image of the judiciary should not be allowed to go
unpunished. In such cases the ultimate victim is the institution. The Court in the said case also
observed that the apology of the Contemnor was not genuine and instead he tried justifying the
malicious statement given by them, therefore the Court sentenced the Contemnor to two months of
imprisonment. The relevant portion of the judgment reads as under:

"1."Judge bashing" and using derogatory and contemptuous language against Judges
has become a favourite pastime of some people. These statements tend to scandalise
and lower the authority of the courts and cannot be permitted because, for
functioning of democracy, an independent judiciary to dispense justice without fear
and favour is paramount. Its strength is the faith and confidence of the people in that
institution. That cannot be permitted to be undermined because that will be against
the public interest.

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

2. Judiciary should not be reduced to the position of flies in the hands of wanton
boys. Judge bashing is not and cannot be a substitute for constructive criticism.

xxxx

12. There is guarantee of the Constitution of India that there will be freedom of
speech and writing, but reasonable restrictions can be imposed. It will be of relevance
to compare the various suggestions as prevalent in America and India. It is
worthwhile to note that all utterances against a Judge or concerning a pending case
do not in America amount to contempt of Court. In Article 19 the expression
"reasonable restrictions" is used which is almost on a par with the American
phraseology "inherent tendency" or "reasonable tendency". The Supreme Court of
America in Bridges v. California [314 US 252 : 86 L Ed 192 (1941)] said : (L Ed p.
203) "What finally emerges from the 'clear and present danger' cases is a working
principle that the substantive evil must be extremely serious and the degree of
imminence extremely high before utterances can be punished."

13. The vehemence of the language used is not alone the measure of the power to punish for
contempt of court. The fires which it kindles must constitute an imminent, not merely a likely,
threat to the administration of justice. The stream of administration of justice has to remain
unpolluted so that purity of court's atmosphere may give vitality to all the organs of the State.
Polluters of judicial firmament are, therefore required to be well taken care of to maintain the
sublimity of court's environment; so also to enable it to administer justice fairly and to the
satisfaction of all concerned. To similar effect were the observations of Lord Morris in Attorney
General v. Times Newspapers [1974 AC 273 : (1973) 3 WLR 298 : (1973) 3 All ER 54 (HL)] , AC at p.
302. It was observed that when "unjustifiable interference is suppressed it is not because those
charged with the responsibilities of administering justice are concerned for their own dignity : it is
because the very structure of ordered life is at risk if the recognised courts of the land are so flouted
that their authority wanes and is supplanted." (All ER p. 66f) xxxx

29. Considered in the light of the aforesaid position in law, a bare reading of the statements makes it
clear that those amount to a scurrilous attack on the integrity, honesty and judicial competence and
impartiality of Judges. It is offensive and intimidating. The contemnor by making such scandalising
statements and invective remarks has interfered and seriously shaken the system of administration
of justice by bringing it down to disrespect and disrepute. It impairs confidence of the people in the
court. Once door is opened to this kind of allegations, aspersions and imputations, it may provide a
handle to the disgruntled litigants to malign the Judges, leading to character assassination. A good
name is better than good riches. Immediately comes to one's mind Shakespeare's Othello, Act II,
Scene iii, 167:

"Good name in man and woman, dear my Lord is the immediate jewel of their souls;
who steals my purse, steals trash; its something, nothing; 'T was mine, its his, and
has been slate to thousands; But he that filches from me my good name, Robs me of
that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed."

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

30. Majesty of law continues to hold its head high notwithstanding such scurrilous attacks made by
persons who feel that the law courts will absorb anything and everything, including attacks on their
honesty, integrity and impartiality. But it has to be borne in mind that such divinity and
magnanimity is not its weakness but its strength. It generally ignores irresponsible statements
which are anything but legitimate criticism. It is to be noted that what is permissible is legitimate
criticism and not illegitimate insinuation. No court can brook with equanimity something which
may have tendency to interfere with the administration of justice. Some people find judiciary a soft
target because it has neither the power of the purse nor the sword, which other wings of democracy
possess. It needs no reiteration that on judiciary millions pin their hopes, for protecting their life,
liberty, property and the like. Judges do not have an easy job. They repeatedly do what rest of us
(the people) seek to avoid, make decisions, said David Pannick in his book Judges.

Judges are mere mortals, but they are asked to perform a function which is truly divine.

xxxx

34. There can be no quarrel with the proposition that anyone who intends to tarnish the image of
judiciary should not be allowed to go unpunished. By attacking the reputation of Judges, the
ultimate victim is the institution. The day the consumers of justice lose faith in the institution that
would be the darkest day for mankind. The importance of judiciary needs no reiteration.

35. When the background facts highlighted above are considered in the background of the principles
set out above, the inevitable conclusion is that the contemnor deserves no sympathy. In fact, the
lenient approach of the Gauhati High Court seems to have encouraged him to make statements on
oath tarnishing the image of the Judges of the highest judiciary. His apology seems to be not
genuine. This is more so because he wanted to justify the statements made in Para 4.

36. Therefore, we find the contemnor guilty of contempt. He is sentenced to undergo imprisonment
for a period of two months. He shall be taken into custody and sent to Tihar Jail, New Delhi,
forthwith to serve the sentence awarded."

51. The Court in Ram Niranjan Roy v. State of Bihar and Ors., (2014) 12 SCC 11, observed that
contempt matters are committed in the face of the High Court and these matters not only humiliate
Judges but scandalise the institution by lowering its dignity in the eyes of the public. The relevant
portion of the said judgment has been extracted below:

16. Thus, when contempt is committed in the face of the High Court or the Supreme
Court to scandalise or humiliate the Judge, instant action may be necessary. If the
courts do not deal with such contempt with strong hand, that may result in
scandalising the institution thereby lowering its dignity in the eyes of the public. The
courts exist for the people. The courts cherish the faith reposed in them by people. To
prevent erosion of that faith, contempt committed in the face of the court need a
strict treatment. The appellant, as observed by the High Court was not remorseful.
He did not file any affidavit tendering apology nor did he orally tell the High Court

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

that he was remorseful and he wanted to tender apology. Even in this Court he has
not tendered apology. Therefore, since the contempt was gross and it was committed
in the face of the High Court, the learned Judges had to take immediate action to
maintain honour and dignity of the High Court. There was no question of giving the
appellant any opportunity to make his defence. This submission of the appellant
must, therefore, be rejected.

xxxxx

19. In Bineet Kumar Singh, In re [(2001) 5 SCC 501 :

2001 SCC (Cri) 908] a forged/fabricated order of this Court was used for the purpose
of conferring some benefits on a group of persons. This Court took a strict view of the
matter and observed as under: (SCC pp. 506- 07, para 6) "6. The law of contempt of
court is essentially meant for keeping the administration of justice pure and
undefiled. It is difficult to rigidly define contempt. While on the one hand, the dignity
of the court has to be maintained at all costs, it must also be borne in mind that the
contempt jurisdiction is of a special nature and should be sparingly used.

The Supreme Court is the highest court of record and it is charged with the duties and
responsibilities of protecting the dignity of the court. To discharge its obligation as the custodian of
the administration of justice in the country and as the highest court imbued with supervisory and
appellate jurisdiction over all the lower courts and tribunals, it is inherently deemed to have been
entrusted with the power to see that the stream of justice in the country remains pure, that its
course is not hindered or obstructed in any manner, that justice is delivered without fear or favour.
To discharge this obligation, the Supreme Court has to take cognizance of the deviation from the
path of justice. The sole object of the court wielding its power to punish for contempt is always for
the course of administration of justice. Nothing is more incumbent upon the courts of justice than to
preserve their proceedings from being misrepresented, nor is there anything more pernicious when
the order of the court is forged and produced to gain undue advantage. Criminal contempt has been
defined in Section 2(c) to mean interference with the administration of justice in any manner. A
false or misleading or a wrong statement deliberately and wilfully made by a party to the
proceedings to obtain a favourable order would undoubtedly tantamount to interference with the
due course of judicial proceedings. When a person is found to have utilised an order of a court which
he or she knows to be incorrect for conferring benefit on persons who are not entitled to the same,
the very utilisation of the fabricated order by the person concerned would be sufficient to hold
him/her guilty of contempt, irrespective of the fact whether he or she himself or herself is the author
of fabrication."

We respectfully concur with these observations."

52. In the case of National Lawyers Campaign for Judicial Transparency and Reforms and Ors. v.
Union of India [W.P.(C) No.191/2010 decision dated 12th March, 2019], the Supreme Court
observed as under:

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

"13. When contempt is committed in the face of the Court, judges(cid:128) hands are not tied
behind their back"

53. In Court on its own Motion v. Virendra Singh Advocate, 2024:DHC:174-DB, an advocate raised
allegations against several judges with respect to unreasonable and flimsy proceedings before the
Trial Court. The Advocate asked for a stay of the Trial Court proceedings. The Division Bench of this
Court, then observed that there is a direct attack on the reputation and functioning of not only one
judge but several judges and it also affects the administration of justice. The Court observed that the
scandalous allegations, imputation against a Judge, discharging his judicial function are more
serious in nature and it's the Courts responsibility to deal such actions with firm hands. Thereafter,
the concerned advocate was sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment of 6 months along with
fine. The relevant portion of the judgment is as under:

"35. We refuse to accept the submissions made by the contemnor/respondent with
the aforesaid averments made by him in the appeal that have been mentioned to give
the entire background so as to establish the injustice suffered by the victim leading to
acquittal of the accused persons. It is manifest from the above that the
contemnor/respondent has made contumacious allegations in the appeal making
scandalous, unwarranted and baseless imputations against the learned Judges of this
Court as well as District Courts who have been discharging their judicial function.
Moreover, being an Officer of this Court making such averments in the judicial
pleading are more serious in nature. It is incumbent upon the Courts of justice to
check such actions with a firm hand which otherwise will have pernicious
consequences."

54. In Sanjeev Kumar v. State of NCT of Delhi & Ors., 2024:DHC:8705- DB, the Appellant had filed
several complaints against his in-laws, close associates of his wife, police officials, judicial officers,
Judges of this Court and had also misbehaved with judges in Court. The Court observed that he has
changed a matrimonial dispute into multifarious criminal complaints thereby occupying substantial
judicial time. The Court then sentenced him to 4 months simple imprisonment.

55. Considering the settled law, as contained in the above judgments, there is no doubt that Mr.
Roop Darshan Pandey is liable to be punished for Contempt of Court. His frivolous allegations
against the Court as also the Registry of the Delhi High Court with respect to listing matters is
completely baseless. Such allegations if ignored, would over a period of time lead to erosion of faith
in the well-established and fair systems and procedures of the Court. The clear allusions are that
there was some wrong-doing, when clearly no such needle of suspicion could have been raised.
Under these circumstances, Mr. Pandey is held guilty of criminal contempt as per Sections 11 and 12
of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.

56. This is the second instance when allegations of contempt have been raised against Mr. Pandey.
Earlier, on 10th February, 2016, Mr. Pandey had filed a complaint to the Ministry of Law and
Justice, Department of Justice, against the Senior Advocate representing HML and one of the
Judges of this Court alleging that they are "known to each other", amongst other allegations. The

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

said complaint requested the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of this Court for a
fair enquiry against such conspiracies. Thereafter several applications were filed against Mr. Roop
Darshan Pandey in CRL.MC.2451/2013 titled Hero Motocorp Ltd. & Anr v. State & Anr. and other
connected matters with respect to the said complaint on 4th March, 2017.

57. The Court noticed that such a complaint would fall under the list of "Subject/Topics which
cannot be treated as grievances" as per the Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring
system portal. However, the Ministry of Law and Justice sent an Office Memorandum dated 23 rd
March, 2016, forwarding the complaint to the Secretary General of the Supreme Court of India, who
in turn forwarded it to the Secretary, Bar Council of India by a communication dated 24th March,
2016.

58. The question that arose in the said case was whether the contempt petition is barred by
limitation in terms of Section 20 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1972, which clearly states that the
complaint has to be filed within one year from the date on which the contempt is alleged to have
been committed. Therefore, the above said applications were dismissed as time barred considering
the contemptuous act took place on 10th February, 2016 and the application has been filed on 4th
March, 2017. The relevant portion of the said order has been extracted below for a bare perusal:

"11. The present applications were filed on 4th March 2017. The trigger was a
complaint dated 10th February, 2016 filed by Mr. Roop Darshan Pandey with the
Ministry of Law and Justice, Department of Justice, Government of India under the
Centralized Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System ("CPGRAM"). A copy
of the said complaint filed online by Mr. Pandey has been enclosed with the present
applications as Annexure-C. The complaint is, inter alia, to the effect that the Senior
Advocate representing HML and one of the Judges of this Court "are known to each
other" and that the Senior Advocate "openly claims that he has all his following high
profile cases involving rich and powerful people managed" with the said learned
Judge and that "date after date are contained by the senior advocate to drag and
frustrate the cases". The details of two of the main cases i.e. Crl. Misc Nos. 2451/2013
and 2525/2013 were mentioned in the complaint. It was further requested that the
Hon'ble Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of this Court "be informed for fair
enquiry" about this conspiracy immediately to meet the ends of justice. Certain
documents were purportedly enclosed with the complaint.

12. The CPGRAM portal lays down a list of "Subjects/Topics which cannot be treated
as grievances(cid:128). One of these categories is Court related/subjudice matters". There is
a declaration by the Respondent No.2 to the effect that "I agree that my grievance
does not fall within the above listed categories". The Applicants/Petitioners point out
that this was a false declaration.

13. The grievance of the Applicants/Petitioners is that acting on the said online
complaint, the Ministry of Law and Justice sent an Office Memorandum (OM(cid:128))
dated 23rd March 2016 forwarding the complaint to the Secretary General of the

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

Supreme Court of India, who in turn forwarded it to the Secretary, Bar Council of
India by a communication dated 24 th March, 2016. Copies of these communications
have also been enclosed. It was further forwarded by the Deputy Registrar of the
Supreme Court of India to the Bar Council of India (BCI(cid:128)). The BCI took up the
matter and sent a copy of the OM dated 23rd March, 2016 to the concerned senior
counsel for his comments.

xxx

23. On the first question whether the contempt petition is barred by limitation in
terms of Section 20 of the Act, the reply of Mr Tiku on behalf of the Applicants is that
although the complaint was filed online on 10th February 2016, action was taken on
the said complaint by the Ministry only on 23rd March, 2016 and it was only then
that the actual scandalizing of the judiciary took place.

24. The Court is unable to agree with the above submission. When the complaint was
filed online on 10th February 2016, it was already available to be seen by anyone in
the Ministry dealing with such complaints. If it is the contention of the Petitioner that
this act itself constituted contempt, then clearly the date of the commission of the
contempt was 10th February, 2016 and not 23rd March, 2016. In any event, as far as
the Petitioners are concerned, Respondent No.2 committed contempt on 10th
February, 2016 when he filed the complaint containing the allegedly scandalous
allegations on line on the CPGRAM. . That date cannot be postponed only because
the Ministry took more than a month to actually send a further communication to the
Secretary General, Supreme Court of India.

25. There is no scope for condoning the delay in filing the present applications
seeking to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 15 of the Act. Section 20
of the Act makes it clear that the complaint has to be filed within one year from the
date on which the contempt is alleged to have been committed. The jurisdiction of the
Court to initiate any proceedings for contempt thereafter "either on its own motion or
otherwise" is taken away. With the present applications having been filed on 4th
March, 2017 i.e. more than one year after 10th February 2016, the question of
entertaining them on the basis of the complaint made by the Respondent No.2 on the
CPGRAM on 10th February, 2016 does not arise.

xxx

27. The consequence of accepting the above submission would be for this Court to
direct these petitions to be placed on the administrative side before the Chief Justice.
However, in view of its decision that these applications are time barred in terms of
Section 20 of the Act, there is no point in adopting that course.

28. The applications are accordingly dismissed as time barred."

Court On Its Own Motion vs Roop Darshan Pandey And Ors. on 23 January, 2025

59. It is clear from the above order that Mr. Pandey is in the habit of making allegations against
Courts, judges and counsels. The offending conduct is therefore not an inadvertent error or by
mistaken advice. It is done with deliberate and with ulterior motives. The apology is thus not
bonafide. Mr. Pandey is accordingly sentenced to two weeks of simple imprisonment with fine of Rs.
2,000/- and in default of payment of fine, further simple imprisonment for 07 days.

60. It is directed that the police authorities shall take the Contemnor into custody from the Court
itself and the Contemnor be sent to Jail.

61. The Contempt Reference is accordingly disposed of in these terms.

62. A copy of this judgment be given Dasti to ld. Counsels for the parties under the signatures of
Court Master.

PRATHIBA M. SINGH JUDGE AMIT SHARMA JUDGE JANUARY 23, 2025 Rahul/dk/ks