G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

Author: Mukta Gupta

Bench: Mukta Gupta

* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+ Crl.M.C. 2695/2010 & Crl.M.A. 13999/2010 (stay)
% Reserved on: 21.12.2011

Decided on: 25th January, 2012

G.S. Matharaoo ..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. V.P. Singh, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
Anil Grover and Mr. Rakesh Kumar
Garg, Advs.
versus

CBI ..... Respondent

Through: Mr. Narender Mann, Spl. PP with Mr. Manoj Pant, Adv.

Coram:

HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA

1. The grievance of the Petitioner in the present petition is to the incompetency of the
authority granting sanction for prosecution against him for offences under Section
13(2) read with Section 13(1)(e) of the Prevention of Corruption Act (POC Act) in RC
EOU-1 2005 A 0005 and thus the initiation of proceedings against the Petitioner is
illegal and void ab initio be set aside.

2. Learned counsel for the Petitioner contends that in terms of the Regulations as
empowered to be framed under Section 480 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act,
1957 (in short „DMC Act(cid:129)), the authority competent to remove the Petitioner is the
Corporation, however, in the case of the Petitioner the sanction has been granted by
the Commissioner, MCD, who is not the authority competent to remove him. He
further contends that as per Section 2(7) of the DMC Act, "Corporation" means the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi established under the Act. Section 44 provides for the
municipal authorities for the efficient performance of the Corporation and the
Commissioner, MCD is one of the authorities. Section 59 of the DMC Act provides for
the functions of the Commissioner and the main function of the Commissioner is
executive in nature. Section 59(d) of the DMC Act provides that subject to any
Regulation that may be made in this behalf, the Commissioner will be the disciplinary
authority in relation to all municipal officers and other municipal employees. Section

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

95 of the DMC Act further provides that an employee can be removed by such
authority as may be prescribed by the Regulations. Thus, on a conjoint reading of
Section 59(d) and Section 95 of the DMC Act, the power of the Commissioner to be
the disciplinary authority of the employees of the Corporation is subject to
Regulations. In terms of Section 92, DMC Act, the Commissioner, MCD does not
have unbridled power of being the appointing authority of all municipal officers and
municipal employees as the same is subject to Section 89 and the Standing
Committee or its delegatee is the appointing authority of municipal employees under
Group „B(cid:129) and „C(cid:129) below the Municipal Secretary or the Municipal Chief Auditor. It
is stated that in exercise of said power under Section 480 of the DMC Act, under
Regulation 7 vide Notification dated 15th December, 1976 the authority competent to
impose all penalties for Group „A(cid:129) posts is the Corporation and the Central
Government is the appellate authority. Only minor penalties against Group „A(cid:129)
employees can be imposed by the Deputy Commissioner and for the said purpose the
Commissioner is the appellate authority. It is contended that the Petitioner is a
Group „A(cid:129) employee and thus, the only authority competent to remove him is the
Corporation. The Corporation being the authority competent to remove the
Petitioner, the sanction for prosecution under Section 19 of the POC Act could be
granted only by the Corporation. Relying upon Ajay Gandhi and another v. B. Singh
& Ors, 2004 II AD (SC) 169 it is contended that admittedly even the MCD is of the
opinion that the Regulations are in vogue and in view of the principle of
contemporanea expositio, it has to be interpreted that the Regulations are still
applicable after the amendment in the DMC Act. Reliance is also placed on State of
Goa v. Babu Thomas, 2005 (8) SCC 130 and Virender Pratap Singh v. State of UP,
1991 Cri.LJ 1964 to contend that in case the sanction is granted by an incompetent
authority, the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the
Constitution and Section 482 Cr.P.C. will quash the order of cognizance as the same
is void ab initio. Reliance is also placed on Chittranjan Das v. State of Orissa, 2011 (7)
SCALE 461 and Radhey Shyam Pandey v. State of Jharkhand, 2011 INDLAW JHKD
325.

3. Learned counsel for the Respondent on the other hand contends that the Petitioner
was charge-sheeted for commission of offences punishable under Section 13(2) read
with Section 13(1)(e) of the POC Act for allegedly being in possession of assets which
could not be satisfactorily accounted for.

During the pendency of the present petition, charge has been directed to be framed against the
Petitioner by the learned Special Judge vide order dated 11th March, 2011. The DMC Act was passed
in the year 1957 and Section 59 of the Act provides for the functions of the Commissioner. A
combined reading of Sections 59 and 95 would show that all the executive powers of the Corporation
vest in the Commissioner. The DMC Services (Control and Appeal) Regulations, 1959 came into
force in the year 1959. Though as per Schedule to Regulation 7, the authority competent to impose
all penalties for the category A posts was the Corporation, however, in the year 1993 there were
amendments in the DMC Act. By virtue of the amendment, sub- Section (d) was inserted in Section

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

59 of the DMC Act by which the Commissioner, MCD was made the disciplinary authority in relation
to all municipal employees and municipal officers. After the insertion of sub- Section (d) in Section
59, no fresh Regulations have been notified till date. The mandate in view of the insertion of this
clause is that till the time new Regulations are made on a future date, the Commissioner shall be the
disciplinary authority of all municipal officers and other municipal employees. As per sub-Section 1
substituted in Section 92 of the DMC Act, the Commissioner, MCD was made the appointing
authority in respect of all the municipal officers and other municipal employees including category
„A(cid:129) officers except the officers mentioned under Section 89 of the DMC Act. Further proviso to
sub-Section 4 of Section 95 was inserted and the effect of which is that against the order of the
Commissioner an appeal was provided before the Administrator. Section 509 of the DMC Act was
omitted. The effect of omission of this provision was that it repealed the schedule to the Regulations.
It is well settled law that in case of any conflict between the Act and the Regulation, the Act has to
prevail. Reliance is placed on Bharathidasan University and another v. All India Council for
Technical Education and others, 2001 (8) SCC 676 and Additional District Magistrate (Rev) Delhi
Admn. V. Siri Ram, 2000(5) SCC 451. It is further contended that in a case where the sanction order
has been passed by an authority, who is competent in law to represent the State Government, the
burden is heavy on the party, who challenges the order of such authority, to show that the authority
competent to pass the order of sanction is somebody else and not the officer who has passed the
sanction order in question. In this regard reliance is place on Lalu Prasad alias Lalu Prasad Yadav v.
State of Bihar through CBI (AHD) Patna, 2007 (1) SCC 49.

4. I have heard learned counsel for the parties. Briefly the allegations against the Petitioner are that
while functioning as public servant in various capacities in the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government of India, New Delhi and Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) during the period from
1st April, 1994 to 10th May, 2005 he acquired assets in his name and in the name of his family
members, which were disproportionate to his known sources of income and could not be
satisfactorily accounted for. The Petitioner was appointed as LDC in the Directorate of Educate,
Delhi Administration in the year 1975 where he worked till 10th February,1981 in different
capacities. On 11th February, 1981 he was appointed as Assistant in the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government of India, New Delhi from where he was transferred to the Prime Minister Officer and
back to the Ministry of Home Affairs. He attained promotions in the Ministry of Home Affairs. On
26 th September, 2001 he was appointed as Additional Deputy Commissioner (HQ) in the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi and remained there till 31 st January, 2010. On 1st February, 2002 he was
appointed as Secretary to the Commissioner where he worked till he absorbed as such on 3 rd
November, 2003 and continued in the same position till 18th August, 2004. The petitioner worked
as Deputy Commissioner, Central Zone in diverted capacity from 19th August, 2004 to 16th
September, 2004 and finally again he worked as Secretary to the Commissioner from 17th
September, 2004 to 11th May, 2005 when his house was searched on 10th May, 2005 resulting in
registration of the abovementioned FIR.

5. The issue that falls for consideration in the present petition is whether the Commissioner, MCD is
the authority competent to grant sanction for prosecution of the Petitioner in terms of Section 19 of
the POC Act. Before adverting to this issue, it is essential to address whether this Court in a petition
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. should decide on the competency of the sanctioning authority or leave it

to be decided during trial.

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

6. In R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay, AIR 1984 SC 684 the Constitution Bench held:

"23. Offences prescribed in Ss. 161, 164 and 165 IPC and S. 5 of the 1947 Act have an
intimate and inseparable relation with the office of a public servant. A public servant
occupies office which renders him a public servant and occupying the office carries
with it the powers conferred on the office. Power generally is not conferred on an
individual person. In a society governed by rule of law power is conferred on office or
acquired by statutory status and the individual occupying the office or on whom
status is conferred enjoys the power of office or power flowing from the status. The
holder of the office alone would have opportunity to abuse or misuse the office. These
sections codify a well-recognised truism that power has the tendency to corrupt. It is
the holding of the office which gives an opportunity to use it for corrupt motives.
Therefore, the corrupt conduct is directly attributable and flows from the power
conferred on the office. This interrelation and interdependence between individual
and the office he holds is substantial and not severable. Each of the three clauses of
sub-section (1) of S. 6 uses the expression 'office' and the power to grant sanction is
conferred on the authority competent to remove the public servant from his office
and S. 6 requires a sanction before taking cognizance of offences committed by public
servant. The offence would be committed by the public servant by misusing or
abusing the power of office and it is from that office, the authority must be competent
to remove him so as to be entitled to grant sanction. The removal would bring about
cessation of interrelation between the office and abuse by the holder of the office. The
link between power with opportunity to abuse and the holder of office would be
severed by removal from office. Therefore, when a public servant is accused of an
offence of taking gratification other than local remuneration for doing or forbearing
to do an official act (S. 161 IPC) or as a public servant abets offences punishable
under Sections 161 and 163 (S. 164 IPC) or as public servant obtains a valuable thing
without consideration from person concerned in any proceeding or business
transacted by such public servant (S. 165 IPC) or commits criminal misconduct as
defined in Section 5 of the 1947 Act, it is implicit in the various offences that the
public servant has misused or abused the power of office held by him as public
servant. The expression 'offices' in the three sub-clauses of Section 6(1) would clearly
denote that office which the public servant misused, or abused for corrupt motives
for which he is to be prosecuted and in respect of which a sanction to prosecute him
is necessary by the competent authority entitled to remove him from that office which
he has abused. This interrelation between the office and its abuse if severed would
render S. 6 devoid of any meaning. And this interrelation clearly provides a clue to
the understanding of the provision in S. 6 providing for sanction by a competent
authority who would be able to judge the action of the public servant before removing
the bar, by granting sanction, to the taking of the cognizance of offences by the court
against the public servant. Therefore, it unquestionably follows that the sanction to
prosecute can be given by an authority competent to remove the public servant from

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

the office which he has misused or abused because that authority alone would be able
to know whether there has been a misuse or abuse of the office by the public servant
and not some rank outsider. By a catena of decisions, it has been held that the
authority entitled to grant sanction must apply its mind to the facts of the case,
evidence collected and other incidental facts before, according sanction. A grant of
sanction is not an idle formality but a solemn and sacrosanct act which removes the
umbrella of protection of government servants against frivolous prosecutions and the
aforesaid requirements must therefore, be strictly complied with before any
prosecution could be launched against public servants. (See Mohd. Iqbal Ahmad v.
State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1979 SC 677). The legislature advisedly conferred
power on the authority competent to remove the public servant from the office to
grant sanction for the obvious reason that that authority alone would be able, when
facts and evidence are placed before him, to judge whether a serious offence is
committed or the prosecution is either frivolous or speculative. That authority alone
would be competent to judge whether on the facts alleged, there has been an abuse or
misuse of office held by the public servant. That authority would be in a position to
know what was the power conferred on the office which the public servant holds, how
that power could be abused for corrupt motive and whether prima facie it has been so
done. That competent authority alone would know the nature and functions
discharged by the public servant holding the office and whether the same has been
abused or misused. It is the vertical hierarchy between the authority competent to
remove the public servant from that office and the nature of the office held by the
public servant against whom sanction is sought which would indicate a hierarchy and
which would therefore, permit inference of knowledge about the functions and duties
of the office and its misuse or abuse by the public servant. That is why the legislature
clearly provided that that authority alone would be competent to grant sanction
which is entitled to remove the public servant against whom sanction is sought from
the office."

7. In State of Goa (supra) their Lordship held:-

"11....According to the counsel for the appellant no failure of justice has occasioned
merely because there was an error, omission or irregularity in the sanction required
because evidence is yet to start and in that view the High Court has not considered
this aspect of the matter and it is a fit case to intervene by this Court. We are unable
to accept this contention of the counsel. The present is not the case where there has
been mere irregularity, error or omission in the order of sanction as required under
sub-section (1) of Section 19 of the Act. It goes to the root of the prosecution case.
Sub-section (1) of Section 19 clearly prohibits that the Court shall not take cognizance
of an offence punishable under Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 alleged to have been
committed by a public servant, except with the previous sanction as stated in clauses
(a), (b) and (c).

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

12. As already noticed, the sanction order is not a mere irregularity, error or
omission. The first sanction order dated 2- 1-1995 was issued by an authority that
was not a competent authority to have issued such order under the Rules. The second
sanction order dated 7-9-1997 was also issued by an authority, which was not
competent to issue the same under the relevant rules, apart from the fact that the
same was issued retrospectively w.e.f. 14-9-1994, which is bad. The cognizance was
taken by the Special Judge on 29-5-1995. Therefore, when the Special Judge took
cognizance on 29-5-1995, there was no sanction order under the law authorising him
to take cognizance. This is a fundamental error which invalidates the cognizance as
without jurisdiction."

8. In Chittranjan Das v. State of Orissa, 2011 (7) SCALE 461 it was held:-

"11. We are further of the opinion that no disputed question being involved, the High
Court instead of making observation as to "whether in present case sanction order is
necessary and whether that was refused by the State Government and what would be
the consequence thereof"

to be decided by the trial court, ought to have decided the issues itself. The facts being not in dispute
the High Court erred in not deciding these issues."

9. In Prakash Singh Badal v. State of Punjab, (2007) 1 SCC 1 it was held:

"48. The sanction in the instant case related to the offences relatable to the Act. There
is a distinction between the absence of sanction and the alleged invalidity on account
of non-application of mind. The former question can be agitated at the threshold but
the latter is a question which has to be raised during trial."

10. It is well settled that the issue of competency of the sanctioning authority goes to the root of the
matter. In a case where the issue goes to the root of the matter, the Court in exercise of its power
under Article 227 and Section 482 Cr.P.C. is duty bound to decide the same. In the present case
there are no disputed questions of fact for which evidence is required to be adduced. The petition
raises issue of interpretation of the provisions of the DMC Act and DMC Services (Control & Appeal)
Regulations, 1959 (in short the Regulations). Thus this Court is required to go into this issue in the
present petition.

11. Before proceeding further in the matter it would be appropriate to note the relevant provisions of
the DMC Act:-

"Section 2 - Definitions (7)"Corporation" means the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
established under this Act;

Section 3 - Establishment of the Corporation Constitution of the Corporation (1) With effect from
such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall

be a Corporation charged with the Municipal Government of Delhi, to be known as the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi.

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property and may by the said name sue and be sued.

[(3)(a) The Corporation shall be composed of the councillors;

Section 44 - Enumeration of municipal authorities For the efficient performance of its functions,
there shall be the following municipal authorities under the Corporation, namely:--

(a) the Standing Committee;

(b) the Wards Committee; and

(c) the Commissioner.

Section 54 - Appointment, etc., of the Commissioner (1) The Central Government
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a suitable person as the
Commissioner of the Corporation.

(2) The Commissioner so appointed shall hold office for a term of five years in the
first instance:

Provided that his appointed may be renewed from time to time for a term not
exceeding one year at a time :

Provided further that where the Commissioner holds a lien on any service under the
Government, the Central Government may any time after reasonable notice to the
Corporation replace his services at the disposal of that Government.

(3) The Central Government--

(a) shall remove the Commissioner from office if at a special meeting of the
Corporation called for the purpose a resolution for such removal has been passed by a
majority of not less than three-fifths of the total number of members;

(b) may remove the Commissioner from office at any time if it appears to that
Government that he is incapable of performing the duties of his office or has been
guilty of neglect or misconduct in the discharge of such duties which renders his
removal expedient.

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

(4) The Commissioner shall not undertake any work unconnected with his office
without the sanction of the Central Government and of the Corporation.

Section 59 - Functions of the Commissioner Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the entire
executive power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act and of any other Act for
the time being in force which confers, any power or imposes any duty on the Corporation, shall vest
in the Commissioner who shall also--

(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties specifically conferred or imposed upon him by
this Act or by any other law for the time being in force;

(b) prescribe the duties of, and exercise supervision and control over the acts and proceedings of, all
municipal officers and other municipal employees other the Municipal Secretary and the Municipal
Chief Auditor and the municipal officers and other municipal employees immediately subordinate to
them and subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, dispose of all questions relating
to the service of the said officers and other employees and their pay, privileges, allowances and other
conditions of service;

(c) on the occurrence or threatened occurrence of any sudden accident or any unforseen event or
natural calamity involving or likely to involve extensive damage to any property of the Corporation,
or danger to human life, take such immediate action as he considers necessary and make a report
forthwith to the Standing Committee and the Corporation of the action he has taken and the reasons
for the same as also of the amount of cost, if any, incurred or likely to be incurred in consequence of
such action, which is not covered by a budget grant;

(d) subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, be the disciplinary authority in
relation to all municipal officers and other municipal employees, Section 92 - Power to make
appointments (1) Subject to the provisions of section 89, the power of the appointing municipal
officers and other municipal employees whether temporary or permanent shall vest in the
Commissioner :

Provided that the power of appointing officers and other employees immediately
subordinate to the Municipal Secretary or the Municipal Chief Auditor to category B
posts of category C posts shall vest in the Standing Committee:

Provided further that the Standing Committee may delegate to the Municipal
Secretary or the Municipal Chief Auditor the power of appointing officers and other
employees immediately subordinate to the said Secretary or Auditor, to category C
posts.

(2) The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes shall be taken into
consideration, consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in
the making of appointments of municipal officers and other municipal employees.

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

Section 95 - Punishment for municipal officers and other employees (1) Every municipal officer or
other municipal employee shall be liable to have his increments or promotion withheld or to be
censured, reduced in rank, compulsorily retired, removed or dismissed for any breach of any
departmental regulations or of discipline or for carelessness, unfitness, neglect of duty or other
misconduct by such authority as may be prescribed by regulations:

Provided that no such officer or other employee as aforesaid shall be reduced in rank,
compulsorily retired, removed or dismissed by any authority subordinate to that by
which he was appointed:

Provided further that the Corporation may by regulations provide that municipal
employees belonging to such classes or categories as may be specified in the
regulations shall be liable also to be fined by such authority as may be specified
therein.

(2) No such officer or other employee shall be punished under sub-section (1) unless
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action
proposed to be taken in regard to him:

Provided that this sub-section shall not apply--

(a) where an-officer or other employee is removed or dismissed on the ground of
conduct which had led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or

(b) where the authority empowered to remove or dismiss such officer or other
employee is satisfied that for some reason to be recorded by that authority, it is not
reasonably practicable to give that person an opportunity of showing cause.

(3) If any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to give to any officer or
other employee an opportunity of showing cause under sub-section (2), the decision
thereon of the authority empowered to remove or dismiss such officer or other
employee shall be final.

(4) An officer or other employee upon whom a punishment has been inflicted under
this section may appeal to such officer or authority as may be prescribed by
regulations.

Provided that in the case of an officer or other employee appointed by the Commissioner an appeal
shall lie to the Administrator.

Section 480 - Supplemental provisions respecting regulations (1) Any regulation which may be
made by the Corporation under this Act, may be made by the Central Government within one year of
the establishment of the Corporation; and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded by
the Corporation in the exercise of its powers under this Act.

(2) No regulation made by the Corporation under this Act shall have effect until it has been
approved by the Central Government and published in the Official Gazette."

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

12. Regulation 7 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Service (Control & Appeal) Regulations, 1959
and the Schedule thereunder read as under:-

"7. Disciplinary Authorities and Appellate Authorities- The authority specified in
Column I of the Schedule may impose on any of the municipal officers or other
municipal employees specified there against in column 2 thereof any of the penalties
specified there against in column 3 thereof. Any such officer or employee may appeal
against the order imposing upon him any of those penalties to the authority specified
in column 4 of the said schedule.

SCHEDULE (See Regulation 7) Description of Posts Authority competent Penalties
Appellate Authority to impose penalties

1. 2. 3. 4.

PART „A(cid:129) In cases where appointments are made under Section 509 All Municipal
officers & Corporation (i), (ii) & (iii) Central Government other Employees Central
Government All. President of India PART „B(cid:129) Posts under the Corporation (Other
than those under the Municipal Chief Auditor or the Municipal Secretary)

1. Category „A(cid:129) posts Corporation. All. Central Government do Deputy (i), (ii) & (iii).
Commissioner.

Commissioner,

2. Category „B(cid:129) & „C(cid:129) Commissioner All. Standing Committee. posts

(i) Where appointment of Deputy (i), (ii) & (iii) Commissioner.

the officer or employee Commissioner.
was made by the Any Municipal (i), (ii) & (iii) Deputy Commissioner.

erstwhile local bodies or Officer or employees authorities specified in to whom
powers to the Second Schedule of impose penalty is the Act. delegated under section
491 of the Act.

(i) Where the Commissioner. All. Standing Committee.

appointment was made by Deputy (i), (ii) & (iii). Commissioner.

the Commissioner Commissioner.
Any Municipal (i), (ii) & (iii) Deputy Commissioner.

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

Officer or employee
to whom powers to
impose penalty is
delegated under

Section 491 of the

Act.

(iii) Where the Deputy All. Commissioner.
appointment was made by Commissioner.
the Deputy Any Municipal (i), (ii) & (iii) Deputy Commissioner.
Commissioner. Officer or employee
to whom powers to

impose penalty is
delegated under

Section 491 of the

Act.

Posts under The Municipal Chief Auditor

1. Category „A(cid:129) Posts Corporation All Central Government
Do Municipal Chief (i), (ii) & (iii) Standing Committee.
Auditor

2. Category „B(cid:129) posts Standing Committee. All Corporation
Do Municipal Chief (i),(ii) & (iii). Standing Committee
Auditor

3. Category „C(cid:129) Posts Municipal Chief All Standing Committee.
Auditor

Posts under the Municipal Secretary:

1. Category „A(cid:129) posts Corporation All. Central Government.
Do Municipal Secretary (i), (ii) & (iii) Standing Committee.

2. Category „B(cid:129) posts Standing Committee All. Corporation
Do Municipal Secretary (i), (ii) & (iiii) Standing Committee

3. Category „C(cid:129) Posts Municipal Secretary All. Standing Committee.

13. It may be noted that as per Section 92(1) DMC Act, the power of the Commissioner to appoint
municipal officers and other municipal employees is not subject to the Regulations but subject to
provisions of Section 89 which provide that the Corporation shall appoint suitable persons to be the
municipal engineers, the municipal health officers, the education officer, the municipal chief
accountant, the municipal secretary and the municipal chief auditor and may appoint one or more
deputy commissioners and such other officer or officers of a status equivalent to or higher than the
officers specified in this sub-Section. Thus, except those officers mentioned in Section 89(1) and

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

category „B(cid:129) and „C(cid:129) posts officers under the Municipal Secretary or the Municipal Chief Auditor,
the Commissioner MCD is the appointing authority. However, Section 59(d) provides that the power
of the Commissioner to be the disciplinary authority in relation to all municipal officers and other
municipal employees is subject to the Regulation that may be made in this behalf. This Section 59(d)
was introduced by way of amendment by Act 67 of 1993 with effect from 1.10.1993. Further the
opening words of the Section 59, which provides for the functions of the Commissioner are, "save as
otherwise provided in this Act". Thus, the power of the Commissioner to be the discretionary
authority in relation to all municipal officers and other municipal employees is subject to other
provisions of the Act and Regulations. However, Section 95(1) which already existed in the Statute
provides that every municipal officer or other municipal employee shall be liable to have his
increment or promotion withheld, to be removed or dismissed by such authority as may be
prescribed by Regulations. Thus both the provision relating to the power of the disciplinary
authority and the provision relating to the functions of the Commissioner MCD as disciplinary
authority are subject to the Regulations. The only difference is in the words used i.e. "any
regulations that may be made in this behalf" in Section 59(d) and "by such authority as may be
prescribed by regulations" under Section 95(1) of the DMC Act. Further the power under Section
59(d) is subject to other provisions of the DMC Act i.e. Section 95.

14. Learned counsel for the CBI canvasses that this Court should read the words "may be made in
this behalf" introduced with effect from 1.10.1993 by the amending Act to mean that the existing
regulations stood repealed and till the new regulations are notified, the Commissioner is the only
competent authority for disciplinary action qua all municipal employees and municipal officers. On
the first blush the contention of the learned counsel for CBI seems to be attractive, however such an
interpretation would lead to negating the provision of Sections 95 and 480 of the DMC Act. Section
480 DMC Act specifically provides that any regulation made may be altered or rescinded by the
Corporation in exercise of its power under the Act. By sub-Section 2 it also provides that no
regulation made by the Corporation under this Act shall have effect until it has been approved by the
Central Government and published in the official gazette. Thus regulations once notified would not
stand repealed automatically without there being any recession or alteration thereof by the
Corporation. Further under the DMC Act, Section 95 specifically provides for the authority
competent to remove or dismiss, subject to the regulations and Section 59 provides for the general
functions of the Commissioner, MCD. Both these provisions are required to be harmoniously
construed. On a harmonious construction being given to both the provisions i.e. 59(d) and 95(1) the
words „may be made in this behalf(cid:129) used in Section 59(d) have to be read as „may be prescribed in
this behalf(cid:129) as used in Section 95(1), as both the provisions in the Act provide for the disciplinary
authority of the municipal officers or other municipal employees, however subject to the
regulations, and Section 59 being further subject to other provisions of the Act.

15. Learned counsel for the CBI also urges that with the introduction of Section 59(d) in the DMC
Act, Section 95 also stands rescinded and will have to be read in subjugation to Section 59(d). In
Pratap Singh v. Manmohan Dey, AIR 1966 SC 1931 their Lordships held:-

"8. It is, therefore, clear that Act V of 1859 is a special statute and Act IV of 1870 is a
general statute. The special statute does not make the sanction of the Board of

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

Revenue a pre-condition for the validity of the lease executed by a Court of Wards so
as to bind all future possessors of the said land, whereas s. 9 of Act V of 1859 imposes
such a condition. The argument is that both the Acts should be read together and, if
so read, the sanction of the Board of Revenue would also be a pre-condition in
addition to the conditions imposed under the proviso to s. 1 of Act V of 1859. In our
view, such a contention is untenable. The principle of law in this regard is well
settled. In Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statues, the relevant principle is stated,
at p. 168, thus :

"A general later law does not abrogate an earlier special one by mere implication.
Generalia specialibus non derogant, or, in other words, "where there are general
words in a latter Act capable of reasonable and sensible application without
extending them to subjects specially dealt with by earlier legislation, you are not to
hold that earlier and special legislation indirectly repealed, altered, or derogated from
merely by force of such general words, without any indication of a particular
intention to do so. In such cases it is presumed to have only general cases in view,
and not particular cases which have been already otherwise provided for by the
special Act" " "

16. Further the interpretation sought to be given by the learned counsel for the Respondent is also
fallacious on the count that though Section 89(1), DMC Act provides that the Corporation will be the
appointing authority for a certain category of senior municipal officers of the rank of Deputy
Commissioner and above, by virtue of Section 59(d) in the absence of any regulations that may be
made, the Commissioner would be their disciplinary and removing authority. There is no dispute
that by virtue of Section 44 of the DMC Act the Commissioner is only one of the municipal
authorities under the Corporation. Thus, with the interpretation as sought to be canvassed by the
Respondent, the disciplinary authority competent to remove the officers of the rank of Deputy
Commissioner and above would be the Commissioner who is subordinate to the Corporation i.e. the
appointing authority. This interpretation is impermissible as the disciplinary authority can never be
lower than the appointing authority.

17. Much emphasis has been laid by the learned counsel for the Respondent that in case of a conflict
between the Act and the Regulation the Act has to prevail. It may be noted that the provision
providing for the Commissioner MCD to be the disciplinary authority is subject to the regulations.
While construing a statute, the plain and simple meaning to the same has to be given and words
"subject to the Regulations" used in both Sections 59(d) and 95(1) cannot be made redundant.
Further the same also renders Section 95(1) DMC Act otiose.

18. In O.P. Singla v. Union of India, 1984 (4) SCC 450 their Lordships held:-

"17. If the matter were to rest with the proviso, its interpretation would have to be
that it does not prescribe a quota for direct recruits: it only enables the appointment
of direct recruits to substantive posts so that, they shall not hold more than one-third
of the total number of substantive posts in the Service. However, it is well recognised

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

that, when a rule or a section is a part of an integral scheme, it should not be
considered or construed in isolation. One must have regard to the scheme of the
fasciculus of the relevant rules or sections in order to determine the true meaning of
any one or more of them. An isolated consideration of a provision leads to the risk of
some other inter-related provision becoming otiose or devoid of meaning. That
makes it necessary to call attention to the very next rule, namely, Rule 8. It provides
by clause 2 that:

"The seniority of direct recruits vis-a-vis promotees shall be determined in the order
of rotation of vacancies between the direct recruits and promotees based on the
quotas of vacancies reserved for both categories by Rule 7 provided that the first
available vacancy will be filled by a direct recruit and the next two vacancies by
promotees and so on."

(emphasis supplied) This provision leaves no doubt that the overall scheme of the rules and the true
intendment of the proviso to Rule 7 is that one-third of the substantive posts in the Service must be
reserved for direct recruits. Otherwise, there would neither be any occasion nor any justification for
rotating vacancies between direct recruits and promotees. Rule 8(2), which deals with fixation of
seniority amongst the members of the Service, provides, as it were, a key to the interpretation of the
proviso to Rule 7 by saying that the proviso prescribes "quotas" and reserves vacancies for both
categories. The language of the proviso to Rule 7 is certainly not felicitous and is unconventional if
its intention was to prescribe a quota for direct recruits. But the proviso, as I have stated earlier,
must be read along with Rule 8(2) since the two provisions are interrelated. Their combined reading
yields but one result, that the proviso prescribes a quota of one-third for direct recruits."

19. In terms of Section 59(d), DMC Act, it is clear that the power of the Commissioner for
disciplinary action is subject to Regulations that may be made thereunder. By virtue of power to
make Regulations under Section 480 of the DMC Act, the Corporation vide its notification dated
15th December, 1976 notified the Schedule to Regulation 7 which provided that for category A posts,
the Corporation was the authority competent to impose penalty. This Regulation 7 and the Schedule
thereto have not been rescinded till date despite the amendment under Section 59 of the DMC Act.
As a matter of fact, the Additional Commissioner (Establishment) had sent a proposal to bifurcate
the posts in category A and as per the amendments proposed, it was proposed that for officers of the
rank of Deputy Commissioner and above, the authority competent to impose the penalty of removal
would be the Corporation and for the post below that of Deputy Commissioner, the Commissioner
would be the competent authority. The amendments proposed reads as under:-

"PROPOSED AMENDMENTS SCHEDULE (See Regulation 7) PART „A(cid:129) In cases
where appointments are made u/s 509 stands deleted (as Section 509 stands
repealed by Act 67 of 1993) PART „B(cid:129) Posts under the Corporation (other than those
under the Municipal Chief Auditor or the Municipal Secretary) Description of Posts
Authority Penalties Appellate competent to Authority impose penalties

1. Category 'A' posts

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

(a) Post of Deputy Commissioner and such other Corporation. All. Central officer or
officers of status equivalent to or Government higher than the status of Deputy
Commissioner. Commissioner (i), (ii), Administrator

(iii), (iv) & (v).

(b) Post below the status of Deputy Commissioner Commissioner All. Administrator
Additional (i), (ii), Commissioner
Commissioner (iii), (iv)
& (v).

2. Category 'B' posts

(i) All Category „B(cid:129) posts including the post to Additional All. Commissioner.
which appointment was made by the erstwhile Commissioner
local bodies or authorities specified in the second Deputy (i), (ii), Addl.
schedule of the Act. Commissioner (iii), (iv) Commissioner
& (v).
3. Category 'C' Post
(i) All category „C(cid:129) posts including the post to Additional All. Commissioner
which appointment was made by the erstwhile Commissioner
local bodies or authorities specified in the second Deputy (i), (ii), Additional
schedule of the Act. Commissioner (iii), (iv) Commissioner
& (v).
Posts under the Municipal Chief Auditor:

1. Category „A(cid:129) Posts Corporation All. Central
Government
-do- Municipal (i), (ii), Standing
Chief Auditor (iii), (iv) Committee.

& (v).
2. Category „B(cid:129) Posts Standing All. Corporation
Committee
-do- Municipal (i), (ii), Standing
Chief Auditor (iii), (iv) Committee.
& (v).
3. Category „C(cid:129) Posts Municipal All Standing
Chief Auditor Committee

Posts under the Municipal Secretary:

1. Category „A(cid:129) posts Corporation All. Central
Government.
-do- Municipal (i), (ii), Standing
Secretary (iii), (iv) Committee.
& (v).

2. Category „B(cid:129) posts Standing All. Corporation

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

Committee
- do - Municipal (i), (ii), Standing
Secretary (iii), (iv) Committee
& (v).

3. Category „C(cid:129) Posts Municipal All. Standing
Secretary Committee.

20. A perusal of the proposal sent by the Additional Commissioner (Establishment)
on 20th September, 2010 itself states that the said amendments in the Regulations
was to bring the same in conformity with the provisions of the Act and as per the 4th
paragraph it was proposed that the existing schedule framed under Regulation 7 as
placed as Annexure A may be substituted by the amended schedule as proposed at
Annexure B. However, this proposal was not accepted by the Corporation. Thus, it is
clear that the Corporation itself is of the considered opinion that the existing
schedule needs to be continued. This is contrary to what has been urged by learned
counsel for the CBI that the schedule to the Regulations stood repealed by the
amendment Act of 1993. Further Section 59(d) of the DMC Act could not be
construed to mean that it repealed the existing Regulations and was only subject to
the Regulations which would be made after the amendment Act. A plain reading of
the provisions of the Act and the Regulations show that the Corporation is the
competent authority to remove the Petitioner from the service and not the
Commissioner, MCD.

21. Further, the contention of the learned counsel for CBI that the effect of omission
of Section 509 by the amendment Act of 1993 is that the schedule to the Regulation
get automatically repealed. It may be noted that in the Schedule as reproduced above
only Part „A(cid:129) relates to officers appointed under Section 509 whereas the Petitioner
is Group „A(cid:129) employee in Part „B(cid:129).

It may be noted that Section 509 related only to the first appointment to the post of General
Manager (Electricity) and any municipal officer or other municipal employee to be made by Central
Government whose term was not to exceed three years.

22. In view of the discussion hereinabove, the only conclusion that can be drawn in the present case
is that the authority competent to remove the Petitioner is the Corporation as notified in the
schedule to the Regulations on 15th December, 1976 which regulations have neither been rescinded
nor amended till date. Thus, the Corporation is the competent authority to grant sanction under
Section 19 of the P.C. Act and not the Commissioner in the case of the Petitioner, who is a Group
„A(cid:129) employee.

23. Since the learned Trial Court has taken cognizance on a sanction granted by an incompetent
authority, the order taking cognizance is illegal and set aside. The Respondent is, however, at liberty
to take sanction for the prosecution of the Petitioner from the competent authority and proceed in

accordance with law.

G.S. Matharaoo vs Cbi on 25 January, 2012

Petition and application stand disposed off accordingly.

(MUKTA GUPTA) JUDGE JANUARY 25, 2012 'ga'