Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.)
on 20 November, 2023

Author: Sanjay Kumar

Bench: Sanjay Kumar, C.T. Ravikumar

2023 INSC 1004 Reportable

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

CIVIL APPEAL No. 2435 OF 2010

Moturu Nalini Kanth … Appellant

Versus

Gainedi Kaliprasad (dead, through LRs.) … Respondents

JUDGMENT

SANJAY KUMAR, J

1. Moturu Nalini Kanth, then a minor, claimed absolute right and title over the properties of late
Venkubayamma under registered Will Deed dated 03.05.1982. It was also claimed that he was
adopted by her, as evidenced by registered Adoption Deed dated 20.04.1982. Nalini Kanth was not
even a year old at that time, as he was born on 10.07.1981. O.S. No. 113 of 1983 was filed by Nalini
Kanth, through his guardian, for declaratory and consequential reliefs in respect of
Venkubayamma’s properties. The learned Principal Subordinate Judge, Srikakulam, held in his
favour, vide judgment dated 30.09.1989, and decreed the suit. However, in appeal, the High Court
of Andhra Pradesh held against Nalini Kanth, vide judgment dated 11.12.2006, and allowed Appeal
Suit No. 2695 of 1989 filed by Gainedi Kaliprasad, Venkubayamma’s grandson through her deceased
daughter, Varalaxmi. Hence, this appeal by Nalini Kanth.

2. Nalini Kanth’s prayer in O.S. No. 113 of 1983 before the learned Principal Subordinate Judge,
Srikakulam, filed through his guardian, was for declaration of his title to the suit properties that had
belonged to Venkubayamma and for recovery of their possession from Kaliprasad, defendant No.1.
His case was that he was adopted by Venkubayamma on 18.04.1982 at Sri Sri Raghunadha Swamy
Temple at Bhapur in Berhampur City, Ganjam District, Orissa (presently, Odisha). It was claimed

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

that the Adoption Deed (Ex. A9) was executed on 20.04.1982 and it was registered on the same day.
It was signed by his natural parents who gave him in adoption and also by his adoptive mother.
Thereafter, Venkubayamma executed registered Will Deed dated 03.05.1982 (Ex. A10) in a sound
state of mind bequeathing all her properties to him. Thereby, Venkubayamma also canceled her
earlier Will Deed dated 26.05.1981 (Ex. A19), executed in favour of Kaliprasad, her grandson. Under
Ex. A10 Will, Venkubayamma appointed Pasupuleti Anasuya (PW 1) as the executor of the Will and
also as the guardian of Nalini Kanth, in the event she died during his minority. In fact,
Venkubayamma died just two months later, on 26.07.1982. Defendants No. 2 to 12 in the suit were
Venkubayamma’s tenants. As disputes arose between Pasupuleti Anasuya, Nalini Kanth’s guardian,
and Kaliprasad as to who was entitled to receive the rents, the suit in O.S. No. 113 of 1983 came to be
filed by her on his behalf.

3. The suit was contested by Kaliprasad. He challenged the Adoption Deed as well as the Will Deed,
under which Nalini Kanth claimed rights. He alleged that Venkubayamma was a resident of
Srikakulam and was very old in 1982. According to him, she was senile and was not in a position to
exercise free will and consciousness. He asserted that the adoption was not true, valid or binding on
him. He contended that Ex. A10 Will was invalid as it was not properly attested. He claimed that
Venkubayamma had brought him up and got his marriage performed and that she had always
treated him as her sole heir and successor.

4. The Trial Court settled the following issues for consideration:

‘1. Whether the plaintiff is the adopted son of Venkubayamma and the Adoption Deed
dated 19.04.1982 (sic) is true?

2. Whether the registered Will dated 03.05.1982 executed by late Venkubayamma is
true and valid?

3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the possession of the suit properties?

4. To what relief?’

5. PWs 1 to 15 were examined for the plaintiff, Nalini Kanth, by his guardian. Ex. A1
to A25 were marked on his behalf. Kaliprasad examined himself as DW 1. He also
examined DWs 2 and 3 but did not adduce any documentary evidence. Exs. C1 & C2
and Exs. X1 & X2 were also made part of the record. Ex C1 is the affidavit dated
16.09.1982 of Balaga Sivanarayana Rao, stating that he had scribed Ex. A10 Will
Deed. It was attested by B. Prasada Rao, Advocate. Ex. C2 is stated to be the affidavit
dated 16.09.1982 of Pydi Appala Suranna, an attesting witness to Ex. A10 Will Deed.
It was attested by K. V. Ramanayya, Advocate. Exs. X1 and X2, as per the version of
Nalini Kanth’s guardian, are the thumb marks of Venkubayamma but this is disputed
by Kaliprasad.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

6. At this stage, we may note that the contesting parties are all related to
Venkubayamma. Kaliprasad, as stated earlier, is the son of her predeceased daughter,
Varalaxmi. Nalini Kanth is the son of her brother’s son, viz., P. Panduranga Rao.
Pasupuleti Anasuya, the guardian, is P. Panduranga Rao’s elder sister and the
paternal aunt of Nalini Kanth.

7. Deposing as PW 1, Pasupuleti Anasuya stated as follows:

Venkubayamma had extended an invitation to attend the adoption of Nalini Kanth.
Ex. A1 is the invitation. The adoption took place at Raghunadha Swamy Temple,
Berhampur, at 10 am on 18.04.1982 and all their relations and friends attended the
ceremony. All the customary rituals for adoption took place and the natural parents
physically handed over the child to Venkubayamma but she, herself, was not present
when the child was physically handed over. Exs. A2 to A4 photographs were taken at
that time. Exs. A5 to A7 are the negatives thereof. Ex. A8 cash receipt was issued by
the photographer, Sunkara Papa Rao. The Adoption Deed dated 20.04.1982 is Ex.
A9. Venkubayamma executed a registered Will on 03.05.1982 and it is Ex. A10. She
was in a sound and disposing state of mind till her death. Venkubayamma gave
necessary instructions to the scribe for writing Ex. A10 Will and she went with her to
the Sub-Registrar’s office. In her cross-examination, PW1 admitted that she was not
there in any of the photos (Exs. A2 to A4). She denied the suggestion that
Venkubayamma was not at all present in those photographs and that she never
adopted Nalini Kanth by executing Ex. A9 Adoption Deed.

8. P. Panduranga Rao, the natural father of Nalini Kanth, deposed as PW 2. He stated
that Venkubayamma was his father’s sister and that he, along with his wife, gave their
second son, Nalini Kanth, in adoption to her.

He said that the adoption ceremony took place on 18.04.1982 and Ex. A1 was the invitation printed
on that occasion. He also spoke of Exs. A2 to A4 photographs and asserted that the child was
handed over by him and his wife to Venkubayamma in adoption. He admitted his signature in the
Adoption Deed (Ex. A9). In his cross-examination, PW 2 admitted that Venkubayamma brought up
Kaliprasad from childhood, got him educated and performed his marriage. He also admitted that
none of the relatives of Venkubayamma residing at Srikakulam attended the adoption ceremony. He
also stated that Kaliprasad was residing in the house of Venkubayamma at the time of Nalini
Kanth’s adoption in 1982.

9. PW 3 is one of the attestors of Ex. A9 Adoption Deed and he is the brother of PWs 1 and 2.
According to him, the other attesting witness to the document as well as the scribe thereof had
expired. He stated that all the rituals had taken place at the time of adoption and the ceremonies
were conducted at Raghunadha Swamy Temple at Berhampur at 10 am. He also spoke of Exs. A2 to
A4 photographs being taken at that time. He further stated that the adoption was registered at
Berhampur on 20.04.1982. PW 4 is the photographer who took Exs. A2 to A4 photographs, which
were marked along with Exs. A5 to A7 negatives and Ex. A8 receipt by PW 1.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

10. PW 5, an Advocate, was examined to identify Venkubayamma in the photographs, as he claimed
to be a distant relative. He stated that the woman in Ex. A3 photograph, wearing spectacles, was
Venkubayamma and that she was also seen in Ex. A2 photograph. He stated that in Ex. A4
photograph, she was seen holding a child in her lap. He stated in his cross- examination that
Kaliprasad was with Venkubayamma since ten years.

11. PW 6 is the document-writer who scribed Ex. A10 Will Deed. He said that he knew Pydi Appala
Suranna, one of the attestors thereto, but he was no more. He stated that he did not know the other
attestor. He claimed that he had known Venkubayamma for about 5 or 6 years. He admitted that Ex.
C1 was in his handwriting and bore his signature. He also admitted that Ex. C2 was in his
handwriting and claimed that Pydi Appala Suranna had signed therein. He said that he was not
present when Venkubayamma signed Ex. A10 Will. Thereupon, he was cross-examined by the
plaintiff’s counsel. In the course of such cross-examination, he stated that he wrote Ex. C1 affidavit
at the dictation of the plaintiff’s counsel at his house. He further stated that he did not see who
exactly signed in Ex. A10 Will Deed. A woman was stated to be sitting at a distance but he did not
know if she was Venkubayamma and whether she signed the document. He stated that the prior Will
of Venkubayamma dated 26.05.1981 (Ex. A19) was also written by him and Venkubayamma had
signed the same in his presence. He further stated that he told the plaintiff’s counsel that, as he did
not see Venkubayamma signing the Will, he would not sign the affidavit. However, the plaintiff’s
counsel persuaded him to sign it, saying that he need not worry about it and that there would be no
consequences. He claimed that some lady from Berhampur who was a relation of Venkubayamma
brought the earlier Will to him and he mentioned the date of the said Will in Ex. A10 Will. In his
cross-examination by the defence, PW 6 stated that while he was in the Registrar’s office attending
to some work, a lady from Berhampur came to him and on that day, the document was written. He
further stated that he knew Venkubayamma but she did not come to him on that day. The woman
who came from Berhampur gave all the information to write the document and the recital in the
Will that the plaintiff’s adoption took place in the house of his natural parents in Chandramanipeta
of Berhampur town was made only on the instructions given by the woman. The other particulars
mentioned in the Will were also stated to have been given by the same woman. After the writing of
the document, according to PW 6, Venkubayamma and the witnesses did not come to him and he
did not go to them. He stated that they took the written Will saying that Venkubayamma could
herself read the document. He further stated that Pydi Appala Suranna, one of the attestors, also did
not sign before him. He also said that he could not say whether the signature in Ex. A10 was that of
Pydi Appala Suranna. In his further cross-examination by the plaintiff’s counsel, PW 6 denied the
suggestion that he was told that the adoption took place at Raghunadha Swamy Temple and the
other formal ceremonies were performed at the natural parents’ house but he omitted to write that
the adoption took place at the temple.

12. PW 7 is the purohit who is stated to have performed the adoption ceremonies. He stated that his
native place was Berhampur and he was doing pourohityam since about 12 years. He stated that he
was the purohit for the family of P. Panduranga Rao (PW 2). He further stated that he knew
Venkubayamma as she used to visit her parents’ house. He stated that he had performed
pourohityam at the time of the adoption. He claimed that the adoption ceremony took place in
Raghunadha Swamy Temple and datta homam was also performed. He further claimed that after

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

the datta homam, the child was physically handed over to the adoptive mother by the parents and
photos were taken on that occasion. He identified himself along with the adoptive mother, the
natural parents and the child in Ex. A2 and Ex. A3 photographs. He further stated that after the
official adoption was over at the temple, they worshipped their personal deity at home. PW 7 stated
in his cross-examination that he used to see Venkubayamma once or twice a year at her parents’
house in Chandramanipeta. He was questioned about certain ceremonies in the context of adoption
and stated that he had not performed the same. He denied the suggestion that the woman in Exs. A2
to A4 photographs was not Venkubayamma. He, however, stated that Raghunadha Swamy Temple
was in Chandramanipeta and Ramalingeshwara and Mukteshwara Temples were in Bhapur.

13. PW 8 is the Advocate who attested Ex. C1 affidavit. PW9 is the Sub-Registrar at Chodavaram
who registered Ex. A19 Will. He stated in his cross-examination that he did not know
Venkubayamma personally and that the identifying witnesses told him that the executant was
Venkubayamma. He said that the executant also stated her name to him. PW 10 was a Director of
the Finger Prints Bureau at Madras. His evidence was that the thumb prints in the Adoption Deed
and the Will Deed were identical to the thumb print of Venkubayamma in the Sub-Registrar’s record
pertaining to Ex. A19 Will. PW 11 was from the Registration Department at Kurnool and spoke of
Venkubayamma affixing her thumb print in Ex. A10 Will in his presence. However, in his
cross-examination, PW 11 admitted that he did not know her personally and relied only on the
identifying witnesses. He also could not say what the age of the said executant was, due to lapse of
time. PW 12, an Advocate at Srikakulam, stated that he knew Venkubayamma, who was a client of
his father and, thereafter, himself. He further stated that he could identify her and claimed that the
woman, wearing glasses and holding a child, in Exs. A2 and A3 photographs, was Venkubayamma.
He admitted in his cross-examination that, though Venkubayamma was about 70 years of age in
1970, she did not appear to be of that age in the photographs. He did not know when she died but
stated that she died by 1985.

14. PW 13 is the Advocate who attested Ex. C2 affidavit. He admitted in his cross-examination that
he previously did not know Pydi Appala Suranna, the deponent thereto. PW 14 was an invitee to the
adoption ceremony at Berhampur. He claimed to be in Ex. A4 photograph. However, in his
cross-examination, he admitted that Venkubayamma must have been about 65 to 70 years old but
the lady in Ex. A4 photograph was about 45 years of age. He also admitted that he was only
acquainted with PW 2, the natural father of the adopted child, and that he had no relationship or
friendship either with Venkubayamma or her husband and except by way of PW 2’s introduction
that she was Venkubayamma, he had no other source of information. PW 15 was an identifying
witness in Ex. A10 Will. According to him, Pydi Appala Suranna and a person, whose name he did
not know, attested Ex. A10 Will on the Sub-Registrar’s Office verandah. He claimed he was present
when the attestors and the scribe signed on Ex. A10. He said that he could identify Venkubayamma
and claimed that she was the third person, wearing spectacles, in Ex. A2 photograph. He identified
her as the woman sitting, wearing glasses, with a baby in her lap, in Ex. A3. He also identified her in
Ex. A4. He asserted that he knew Venkubayamma for the last 10 years but he did not know any other
details or when she died.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

15. Kaliprasad deposed as DW 1. He stated that Venkubayamma was his mother’s mother and
asserted that she never adopted any boy during her lifetime. He asserted that Venkubayamma only
had one daughter and he was the son of that daughter. He claimed to be the sole heir to the
properties of late Venkubayamma. He claimed that since childhood, he was brought up in
Venkubayamma’s house and that his marriage was performed by her in February, 1982. According
to him, Venkubayamma was between 75 to 80 years of age at the time of her death. He said that she
told him about a Will in his favour after his marriage but he had not seen the document. He denied
that she had adopted a boy. According to him, she went to Srikakulam till the second week of July,
1982, and after that, she wanted to go to her relations’ houses at Vizianagaram, Berhampur and
Khurda Road. He further stated that, by the time he attained the age of discretion, Venkubayamma’s
hair had turned grey and asserted that it was false that Exs. A2 to A4 photographs were of
Venkubayamma. He stated that she used to write letters to him whenever she was in camp and he
was, therefore, acquainted with her signature and handwriting. He stated that Ex. A9 Adoption
Deed did not bear the signature of Venkubayamma. He further stated that Exs. X1 and X2 were not
the thumb marks of Venkubayamma. He denied the suggestion that Venkubayamma had adopted
Nalini Kanth and had executed a Will, whereby he would be entitled to her properties.

16. In his cross-examination, Kaliprasad stated that he did not have any photograph of
Venkubayamma. He denied the suggestion that she used to apply hair dye. He also denied that the
woman in Exs. A2 and A3 photographs was Venkubayamma. According to him, Venkubayamma
used to write letters to him while he was at Hyderabad and she was in the habit of signing in English
using disjointed letters. He admitted that some of her letters were signed in Telugu but a few were
signed in English. He asserted that the signatures in Ex. A10 were not that of Venkubayamma and
denied that the thumb marks (Exs. X1 and X2) were of Venkubayamma.

17. As already noted supra, the Trial Court held in favour of Nalini Kanth but, in appeal, the High
Court reversed that decision. In essence, this case would turn upon the validity of Ex. A10 Will.
Further, the validity of Ex. A9 Adoption Deed would also require examination. In the event Ex. A10
Will is found to be valid, Nalini Kanth would be the sole heir thereunder, but if it is held to be invalid
and Ex. A9 Adoption Deed is found to be valid, he would be an heir, as an adopted son, along with
Kaliprasad, the grandson. He would then be entitled to a half-share in the suit properties.

18. First and foremost, we may note the essential legal requirements to prove a Will. Section 63 of
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (for brevity, ‘the Succession Act’), prescribes the mode and method
of proving a Will and, to the extent relevant, it reads as under: -

“63. Execution of unprivileged Wills. - Every testator, not being a soldier employed in
an expedition or engaged in actual warfare, or an airman so employed or engaged, or
a mariner at sea, shall execute his Will according to the following rules: -

(a). …….

(b). …….

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

(c). The Will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen the
testator sign or affix his mark to the Will or has seen some other person sign the Will,
in the presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received from the testator
a personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or the signature of such other
person; and each of the witnesses shall sign the Will in the presence of the testator,
but it shall not be necessary that more than one witness be present at the same time,
and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.”

19. In turn, Sections 68 and 69 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for brevity, ‘the Evidence Act’),
read as under:

‘68. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested. - If a document is
required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting
witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an
attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court and capable of giving
evidence:

Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the
execution of any document, not being a Will, which has been registered in accordance
with the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), unless its
execution by the person by whom it purports to have been executed is specifically
denied.

Section 69. Proof where no attesting witness found. – If no such attesting witness can
be found, or if the document purports to have been executed in the United Kingdom,
it must be proved that the attestation of one attesting witness at least is in his
handwriting, and that the signature of the person executing the document is in the
handwriting of that person.’

20. Trite to state, mere registration of a Will does not attach to it a stamp of validity and it must still
be proved in terms of the above legal mandate. In Janki Narayan Bhoir vs. Narayan Namdeo Kadam
1, this Court held that the requirements in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 63 of the Succession Act
have to be complied with to prove a Will and the most important point is that the Will has to be
attested by two or more witnesses and each of these witnesses must have seen the testator sign or
affix his mark to the Will or must have seen some other person sign the Will in the presence of and
by the direction of the testator or must have received from the testator a personal acknowledgment
of his signature or mark or of the signature or mark of such other person and each of the witnesses
has to sign the Will in the presence of the testator. It was further held that, a person propounding a
Will has got to prove that it was duly and validly executed and that cannot be done by simply
proving that the signature on (2003) 2 SCC 91 the Will was that of the testator, as the propounder
must also prove that the attestations were made properly, as required by Section 63(c) of the
Succession Act. These principles were affirmed in Lalitaben Jayantilal Popat vs. Pragnaben
Jamnadas Kataria and others 2.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

21. More recently, in Ramesh Verma (Dead) through LRs. vs. Lajesh Saxena (Dead) by LRs. and
another3, this Court observed that a Will, like any other document, is to be proved in terms of the
provisions of the Evidence Act. It was held that the propounder of the Will is called upon to show by
satisfactory evidence that the Will was signed by the testator, that the testator at the relevant time
was in a sound and disposing state of mind, that he understood the nature and effect of the
disposition and put his signature to the document of his own free will and the document shall not be
used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its
execution. It was noted that this is the mandate of Section 68 of the Evidence Act and the position
would remain the same even when the opposite party does not deny the execution of the Will.

22. Long ago, in H. Venkatachala Iyengar vs. B.N. Thimmajamma and others4, a 3-Judge Bench of
this Court noted that there is an important (2008) 15 SCC 365 (2017) 1 SCC 257 AIR 1959 SC 443
feature which distinguishes Wills from other documents as, unlike other documents, a Will speaks
from the death of the testator and, therefore, when it is propounded or produced before a Court, the
testator who has already departed from the world cannot say whether it is his Will or not. It was
held that the onus on the propounder to prove the Will can be taken to be discharged on proof of the
essential facts, such as, that the Will was signed by the testator; that the testator at the relevant time
was in a sound and disposing state of mind; that he understood the nature and effect of the
dispositions; and that he put his signature to the document of his own free will. It was, however,
noted by the Bench that there may be cases in which the execution of the Will is surrounded by
suspicious circumstances and the same would naturally tend to make the initial onus very heavy and
unless it is satisfactorily discharged, Courts would be reluctant to treat the document as the last Will
of the testator.

23. Again, in Jagdish Chand Sharma vs. Narain Singh Saini (Dead) through LRs. and others , this
Court held as under:

‘57. A will as an instrument of testamentary disposition of property being a legally
acknowledged mode of bequeathing a testator's acquisitions during his lifetime, to be
acted upon only on his/her demise, it is no longer res integra, that it carries with it an
overwhelming element of sanctity. As understandably, the testator/testatrix, as the
case may be, at the time of testing the document for its validity, would not be
available, stringent (2015) 8 SCC 615 requisites for the proof thereof have been
statutorily enjoined to rule out the possibility of any manipulation. This is more so, as
many a times, the manner of dispensation is in stark departure from the prescribed
canons of devolution of property to the heirs and legal representatives of the
deceased. The rigour of Section 63(c) of the Act and Section 68 of the 1872 Act is thus
befitting the underlying exigency to secure against any self-serving intervention
contrary to the last wishes of the executor.

57.1. Viewed in premise, Section 71 of the 1872 Act has to be necessarily accorded a strict
interpretation. The two contingencies permitting the play of this provision, namely, denial or failure
to recollect the execution by the attesting witness produced, thus a fortiori has to be extended a
meaning to ensure that the limited liberty granted by Section 71 of the 1872 Act does not in any

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

manner efface or emasculate the essence and efficacy of Section 63 of the Act and Section 68 of the
1872 Act. The distinction between failure on the part of an attesting witness to prove the execution
and attestation of a will and his or her denial of the said event or failure to recollect the same, has to
be essentially maintained. Any unwarranted indulgence, permitting extra liberal flexibility to these
two stipulations, would render the predication of Section 63 of the Act and Section 68 of the 1872
Act, otiose. The propounder can be initiated to the benefit of Section 71 of the 1872 Act only if the
attesting witness/witnesses, who is/are alive and is/are produced and in clear terms either
denies/deny the execution of the document or cannot recollect the said incident.’

24. Earlier, in Bhagat Ram and another vs. Suresh and others 6, this Court observed as under:

‘12. According to Section 68 of the Evidence Act, 1872, a document required by law to
be attested, which a Will is, shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness
at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if available to depose
and amenable to the process of the court. The proviso inserted in Section 68 by Act 31
of 1926 dispenses with the mandatory requirement of calling an attesting witness in
proof of the execution of any document to which Section 68 applies if it has (2003) 12
SCC 35 been registered in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Registration
Act, 1908 unless its execution by the person by whom it purports to have been
executed is specifically denied. However, a Will is excepted from the operation of the
proviso. A Will has to be proved as required by the main part of Section 68.’

25. Thereafter, in Benga Behera and another vs. Braja Kishore Nanda and others7, this Court held
thus:

‘40. It is now well settled that requirement of the proof of execution of a will is the
same as in case of certain other documents, for example gift or mortgage. The law
requires that the proof of execution of a will has to be attested at least by two
witnesses. At least one attesting witness has to be examined to prove execution and
attestation of the will. Further, it is to be proved that the executant had signed and/or
given his thumb impression in presence of at least two attesting witnesses and the
attesting witnesses had put their signatures in presence of the executant.’

26. Much more recently, in Ashutosh Samanta (Dead) by LRs. and others vs. SM. Ranjan Bala Dasi
and others 8, this Court noted that where the attesting witnesses died or could not be found, the
propounder of the Will is not helpless, as Section 69 of the Evidence Act would be applicable. On
facts, this Court found that others who were present at the time the testator and the two attesting
witnesses signed the Will were examined and the Will was also supported by a registered partition
deed which gave effect to it. Considering these circumstances in totality and as none of the heirs of
the testator contested the grant of letters of (2007) 9 SCC 728 (2023) SCC OnLine SC 255
administration, this Court held that there could be only one conclusion, i.e., that the Will was duly
executed and the propounder was successful in proving it. Notably, there was no contest to the Will
and that is a distinguishing factor when compared with the case on hand.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

27. On the same lines, in Ved Mitra Verma vs. Dharam Deo Verma9, having found that the attesting
witnesses had died, this Court held that the examination of the Sub-Registrar, who had registered
the Will and who spoke of the circumstances in which the attesting witnesses as well as the testator
had signed on the document, would be sufficient to prove the Will in terms of Section 69 of the
Evidence Act.

28. However, in Apoline D’ Souza vs. John D’ Souza 10, this Court had noted that Section 68 of the
Evidence Act provides for the mode and manner through which execution of a Will is to be proved
and held that proof of attestation of a Will is a mandatory requirement. Referring to the earlier
judgment in Naresh Charan Das Gupta vs. Paresh Charan Das Gupta11, which held to the effect that
merely because the witnesses did not state that they signed the Will in the presence of the testator, it
could not be held that there was no due attestation and it would depend on the circumstances
elicited in evidence as to whether the attesting witnesses (2014) 15 SCC 578 (2007) 7 SCC 225 AIR
1955 SC 363 signed in the presence of the testator, this Court held that the mode and manner of
proving due execution of the Will would indisputably depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case, and it is for the propounder of the Will to remove the suspicious circumstances.

29. In Bhagavathiammal vs. Marimuthu Ammal and others 12, a learned Judge of the Madurai
Bench of the Madras High Court observed that the difference between Section 68 and Section 69 of
the Evidence Act is that, in the former, one attesting witness, at least, has to be called for the
purpose of proving execution and in the latter, it must be proved that the attestation of one attesting
witness, at least, is in his handwriting and the signature of the person executing the document is in
the handwriting of that person. It was rightly observed that Section 69 of the Evidence Act does not
specify the mode of such proof and, in other words, the handwriting can be spoken to by a person
who has acquaintance with the handwriting or the signature can be proved by comparison with the
admitted handwriting or signature of the person executing the document.

30. Applying the above edicts to the case on hand, we may note that neither of the attesting
witnesses to Ex. A10 Will Deed, viz., Pydi Appala Suranna and B. A. Ramulu, was examined before
the Trial Court, in compliance with Section 68 of the Evidence Act. Pydi Appala Suranna was 2010
(2) Madras Weekly Notes (Civil) 704 stated to have expired by the time the trial commenced and the
whereabouts of B. A. Ramulu were not known. Therefore, Section 69 of the Evidence Act could have
been made use of to prove the Will but no witness was examined who was familiar with the
signature of either of the attesting witnesses and who could vouch for the same or produce an
admitted signature before the Trial Court. The mere marking of Exs. C1 & C 2 affidavits was not
sufficient to satisfy the requirement of Section 69 of the Evidence Act. More so, as Balaga
Sivanarayana Rao (PW 6), the scribe of those affidavits, said that Pydi Appala Suranna did not sign
Ex. A10 Will in his presence and he could not say whether the signature therein was that of Pydi
Appala Suranna. Similarly, K. V. Ramanayya (PW 13), who attested Ex. C2 affidavit, supposedly of
Pydi Appala Suranna, said that he did not even know Pydi Appala Suranna and, therefore, he could
not vouch for his identity. No evidence was adduced to prove the signature of the other attesting
witness, B. A. Ramulu.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

31. The contention that Section 69 of the Evidence Act does not require actual proof of the
handwriting of at least one attesting witness and proof of the signature of the executant being in that
person’s handwriting cannot be accepted. Ashutosh Samanta (supra) and Ved Mitra Verma (supra)
also did not hold so and, in any event, both are distinguishable on facts. In one, there was no contest
to the Will and in the other, the Sub-Registrar himself adduced acceptable evidence in purported
discharge of the mandate of Section 69 of the Evidence Act. Presently, no such clinching evidence
has been produced to satisfy that mandate. It may be noted that PW 11, who was from the
Registration Department, admitted that he did not know Venkubayamma personally and could not
even recall her age. Therefore, his evidence that he witnessed the signing of Ex. A10 Will has no
import in establishing its genuineness and validity. Ex. A19 Will Deed dated 26.05.1981 was marked
in evidence by Nalini Kanth’s guardian, Pasupuleti Anasuya, but it was not proved as per Section 63
of the Evidence Act. Kaliprasad said that he had never seen it. Therefore, merely because Kaliprasad
was shown as the sole legatee therein, it cannot be accepted as genuine. In consequence, the
signatures and thumb marks therein and available with the Registration Department, in connection
therewith, cannot be assumed to be those of Venkubayamma. We may also note that this document
was not of any particular antiquity as it was executed on 26.05.1981, just about a year before Ex. A10
Will dated 03.05.1982. Therefore, comparison of Exs. X1 & X2 thumb marks with the thumb marks
available with the Registration Department in the context of Ex. A19 Will does not prove anything.

32. For the purposes of Section 69 of the Evidence Act, it is not enough to merely examine a random
witness who asserts that he saw the attesting witness affix his signature in the Will. The very
purpose and objective of insisting upon examination of at least one attesting witness to the Will
would be entirely lost if such requirement is whittled down to just having a stray witness depose that
he saw the attesting witness sign the Will. The evidence of the scribe of the disputed Will (PW 6)
also casts a doubt on the identity of the executant as he specifically stated that a woman was sitting
at a distance but he could not tell whether she was Venkubayamma and he could not also tell
whether Venkubayamma had signed the document. In effect, Ex. A10 Will was not proved in
accordance with law and it can have no legal consequence. Nalini Kanth’s claim of absolute right and
title over Venkubayamma’s properties on the strength thereof has, therefore, no legs to stand upon
and is liable to be rejected.

33. In addition thereto, the suspicious circumstances that surround Ex. A10 Will render it highly
unbelievable. Venkubayamma performed Kaliprasad’s marriage in February, 1982, i.e., just a few
months before the alleged adoption ceremony and execution of Ex. A9 and Ex. A10. PW 2, Nalini
Kanth’s natural father, also stated so. He also said that Kaliprasad was residing with
Venkubayamma at the time of the adoption. These being the admitted facts, Kaliprasad being fully
disinherited under Ex. A10 Will is surprisingly odd and opposed to normal behaviour. The
disowning of her own grandson by Venkubayamma is a suspicious circumstance that remained
unexplained. Unless there was some catastrophic incident which estranged her from him during
those two months, it is not believable that Venkubayamma would have cast out her own grandson
and excluded him from her Will. A passing sentence in Ex. A10 Will that he became uncaring
towards her and was placing her in difficulties is not sufficient to explain this total disinheritance of
a grandson within a few months of performing his marriage. More so, when the witnesses’ evidence
confirmed that he was with her and was on amicable terms throughout.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

34. That apart, Venkubayamma stated in Ex. A10 Will that the adopted child would perform her
funeral rites, pinda pradaan and other annual shastric ceremonies of her ancestors. As already noted
earlier, the adopted child was of less than one year age at that time and Venkubayamma was in her
70s, if not more. If so, this expectation on her part, if at all believable, was wholly unrealistic.
Significantly, Kaliprasad stated that it was he who performed the obsequies of Venkubayamma, his
grandmother. Further, the scribe of Ex. A10 Will (PW 6) categorically stated that the instructions for
scribing it were given by some other woman and not Venkubayamma, whereas Pasupuleti Anasuya
(PW 1) stated that it was Venkubayamma, herself, who had given such instructions. So many
suspicious circumstances surrounding Ex. A10 Will make it very difficult for us to accept and act
upon the same, even if it had been proved as per law.

35. Coming to the adoption ceremony of 18.04.1982 and Ex. A9 Adoption Deed, whereunder Nalini
Kanth would, in the alternative, claim a half-share in Venkubayamma’s properties, we find that the
same are also shrouded with equally suspicious circumstances. No doubt, Ex. A9 Adoption Deed was
registered and Section 16 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 (for brevity, ‘the Act of
1956’), raises a presumption in favour of a registered document relating to adoption. It reads as
follows:

‘16. Presumption as to registered documents relating to adoption - Whenever any
document registered under any law for the time being in force is produced before any
court purporting to record an adoption made and is signed by the person giving and
the person taking the child in adoption, the court shall presume that the adoption has
been made in compliance with the provisions of this Act unless and until it is
disproved.’ The presumption, as is clear from the provision itself, is rebuttable. In G.
Vasu vs. Syed Yaseen Sifuddin Quadri 13, a Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court pointed out that presumptions are of two kinds - presumptions of fact and of
law. It was noted that a presumption of fact is an inference logically drawn from one
fact as to the existence of AIR 1987 Andhra Pradesh 139 other facts and such
presumptions of fact are rebuttable by evidence to the contrary. It was also held that
presumptions of law may be either irrebuttable, so that no evidence to a contrary may
be given, or rebuttable, and a rebuttable presumption of law is a legal rule to be
applied by the Courts in the absence of conflicting evidence. This view was affirmed
by this Court in Bharat Barrel & Drum Manufacturing Company vs. Amin Chand
Payrelal14 and it was held that in order to disprove a presumption, such facts and
circumstances have to be brought on record, upon consideration of which, the Court
may either believe that the consideration did not exist or its non-existence was so
probable that a prudent man would, under the circumstances of the case, act upon
the plea that it did not exist.

36. In this regard, we may also note that Section 11 of the Act of 1956 stipulates the conditions to be
complied with to constitute a valid adoption and, to the extent relevant, it reads as under:

‘11. Other conditions for a valid adoption. - In every adoption, the following
conditions must be complied with: ―

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

(i) to (v) ….;

(vi) the child to be adopted must be actually given and taken in adoption by the
parents or guardian concerned or under their authority with intent to transfer the
child from the family of its birth or in the case of an abandoned child or a child whose
parentage is not known, from the place or family where it has been brought up to the
family of its adoption:

(1999) 3 SCC 35 Provided that the performance of datta homam shall not be essential
to the validity of adoption’

37. We may now take note of relevant case law. In Laxmibai (Dead) through LRs. and another vs.
Bhagwantbuva (Dead) through LRs. and others15, this Court held that the mere signature or thumb
impression on a document is not adequate to prove the contents thereof but, in a case where a
person who has given his son in adoption appears in the witness box and proves the validity of the
said document, the Court ought to accept the same taking into consideration the presumption under
Section 16 of the Act of 1956. Ergo, the proving of the validity of the document is a must.

38. Much earlier, in Kishori Lal vs. Mst. Chaltibai16, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court held that, as an
adoption results in changing the course of succession, it is necessary that the evidence to support it
should be such that it is free from all suspicions of fraud and so consistent and probable as to leave
no occasion for doubting its truth. On facts, the Bench found that no invitations were sent to the
brotherhood, friends or relations and no publicity was given to the adoption, rendering it difficult to
believe.

39. In Govinda vs. Chimabai and others 17, a Division Bench of the Mysore High Court observed
that the mere fact that a deed of adoption has (2013) 4 SCC 97 AIR 1959 SC 504 AIR 1968 Mysore
309 been registered cannot be taken as evidence of proof of adoption, as an adoption deed never
proves an adoption. It was rightly held that the factum of adoption has to be proved by oral evidence
of giving or taking of the child and that the necessary ceremonies, where they are necessary to be
performed, were carried out in accordance with shastras.

40. In Padmalav Achariya and another vs. Srimatyia Fakira Debya and others18, the Privy Council
found that a cloud of suspicion rested upon an alleged second adoption and the factum of the second
adoption was sought to be proved on the basis of evidence of near relatives who were also partisan,
which made it unsafe to act upon their testimonies. The Privy Council held that both the adoptions
were most improbable in themselves and were not supported by contemporaneous evidence.

41. In Jai Singh vs. Shakuntala19, this Court noted the statutory presumption envisaged by Section
16 of the Act of 1956 and observed that though the legislature had used ‘shall’ instead of any other
word of lesser significance, the inclusion of the words ‘unless and until it is disproved’ appearing at
the end of the statutory provision makes the situation not that rigid but flexible enough to depend
upon the evidence available on record in support of the adoption. This Court further noted that it is
a matter of AIR 1931 Privy Council 81 (2002) 3 SCC 634 grave significance by reason of the factum

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

of adoption and displacement of the person adopted from the natural succession - thus onus of
proof is rather heavy. This Court held that the statute allowed some amount of flexibility, lest it
turns out to be solely dependent on a registered adoption deed. The reason for inclusion of the
words ‘unless and until it is disproved’, per this Court, have to be ascertained in proper perspective
and as such, the presumption cannot but be said to be a rebuttable presumption. This Court further
held that the registered instrument of adoption presumably stands out to be taken to be correct but
the Court is not precluded from looking into it upon production of some evidence contra the
adoption and the Court can always look into such evidence. This Court further noted the mandate of
Section 11 (vi) of the Act of 1956 and held that the ‘give and take in adoption’ is a requirement which
stands as a sine qua non for a valid adoption.

42. In Mst. Deu and others vs. Laxmi Narayan and others 20, this Court observed that in view of
Section 16 of the Act of 1956, whenever any document registered under law is produced before the
Court purporting to record an adoption made and is signed by the persons mentioned therein, the
Court should presume that the adoption has been made in compliance with the provisions of the
said statute, unless and until it is (1998) 8 SCC 701 disproved. It was further held that in view of
Section 16 of the Act of 1956, it is open to the persons who challenge the registered deed of adoption
to disprove the same by taking independent proceedings.

43. In Lakshman Singh Kothari vs. Rup Kanwar (Smt) alias Rup Kanwar Bai21, having referred to
texts on Hindu Law, this Court observed:

‘10. The law may be briefly stated thus: Under the Hindu law, whether among the
regenerate caste or among Sudras, there cannot be a valid adoption unless the
adoptive boy is transferred from one family to another and that can be done only by
the ceremony of giving and taking. The object of the corporeal giving and receiving in
adoption is obviously to secure due publicity. To achieve this object, it is essential to
have a formal ceremony. No particular form is prescribed for the ceremony, but the
law requires that the natural parent shall hand over the adoptive boy and the
adoptive parent shall receive him. The nature of the ceremony may vary depending
upon the circumstances of each case. But a ceremony there shall be, and giving and
taking shall be part of it. The exigencies of the situation arising out of diverse
circumstances necessitated the introduction of the doctrine of delegation; and,
therefore, the parents, after exercising their volition to give and take the boy in
adoption, may both or either of them delegate the physical act of handing over the
boy or receiving him, as the case may be, to a third party.’

44. In M. Vanaja vs. M. Sarla Devi (Dead)22, this Court took note of the relevant provisions of the
Act of 1956 and held that a plain reading of the said provisions made it clear that compliance with
the conditions in Chapter 1 of the Act of 1956 is mandatory for an adoption to be treated as valid and
that the two important conditions mentioned in Sections 7 and 11 of the Act AIR 1961 SC 1378
(2020) 5 SCC 307 of 1956 are the consent of the wife before a male Hindu adopts a child and the
proof of the ceremony of actual giving and taking in adoption.

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

45. In Dhanno wd/o Balbir Singh vs. Tuhi Ram (Died) represented by his LRs.23, a learned Judge of
the Punjab & Haryana High Court, faced with the argument that Section 16 of the Act of 1956
required a registered adoption deed to be believed, held that the presumption thereunder, if any, is
rebuttable and by merely placing the document on record without proving the ceremony of due
adoption, it could not be said that there was a valid adoption. The learned Judge rightly noted that
the factum of adoption must be proved in the same way as any other fact and such evidence in
support of the adoption must be sufficient to satisfy the heavy burden that rests upon any person
who seeks to displace the natural succession by alleging an adoption.

46. Viewed in the backdrop of the above legal principles, as Ex. A9 Adoption Deed was registered,
the presumption under Section 16 of the Act of 1956 attached to it and it was for Kaliprasad to rebut
that presumption. We find that he did so more than sufficiently. Mere registration of Ex. A9
Adoption Deed did not absolve the person asserting such adoption from proving that fact by cogent
evidence and the person contesting it from adducing evidence to the contrary. It is in this respect
that various AIR 1996 P & H 203 suspicious circumstances attached to the adoption ceremony of
18.04.1982 assume significance. It is an admitted fact that Venkubayamma was residing ordinarily
at Srikakulam, which is at a distance (98 miles/150 kms) from Berhampur. While so, PW 2, himself,
stated that she did not invite any of her relations from Srikakulam to attend the adoption ceremony
at Berhampur. Normally, such occasions would not be kept secret or confidential as an adoption
would usually be made with much pomp and celebration. The clandestine manner in which the
alleged adoption is stated to have taken place raises a doubt but the same has not been adequately
explained. Further, as already noted supra, no evidence was adduced to prove that relations between
Venkubayamma and Kaliprasad, her grandson, had fallen out. The document also does not record
any reasons as to why Venkubayamma was not happy with Kaliprasad, whose marriage she had
performed in February 1982, just a few months earlier.

47. Pertinent to note, Pasupuleti Anasuya (PW 1) who was to play a pivotal role as the guardian of
the adopted child in the event of Venkubayamma’s death, seems to have been absent at the adoption
ceremony and no reason or explanation worth the name has been offered therefor. She, herself,
admitted that she was not present when the actual ‘giving and taking of the child in adoption’ took
place and that she is not seen in Exs. A2 to A4 photographs. Significantly, she never stated in clear
terms that she was actually present at that time. Her brothers (PWs 2 and

3) also did not vouch for her presence at the adoption. If she was to play such an important role in
the adopted child’s life, her absence at the ceremony and in the photographs speaks volumes.

48. PW 4 (the photographer), PW 7 (the purohit) and PW 14 (an identifying witness) were examined
in addition to the family members, viz., PWs 2 and 3, to speak of their actually seeing the giving and
taking of the child in adoption, but we find that their depositions are also not free from doubt. The
photographs allegedly taken at the time of the adoption ceremony, viz., Exs. A2 to A4, are also not
convincing. PW 12 and PW 14, who stated that the woman in the photographs was Venkubayamma,
conceded that she did not look like a woman aged 70 years. The identifying witness (PW 14) himself
stated that the woman in the photographs looked about 45 years old. Two of the tenants of
Venkubayamma, viz., DW 2 and DW 3, said that the woman in the photographs was not

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

Venkubayamma.

49. Though the High Court opined that the woman in Exs. A2 to A4 photographs was not
Venkubayamma for the reason that Venkubayamma was a woman of advanced age and it was
difficult to believe that she would have dyed her hair at that age, the same cannot be a deciding
factor by itself. However, the issue, presently, is not whether Venkubayamma would have dyed her
hair at the age of 70+ years but whether the dark-haired woman in Exs. A2 to A4 photographs was
Venkubayamma at all. In this regard, as already noted above, it was not just the color of her hair
that raised a question. Doubt arises, not only on that count, but even as to the age of the woman in
the photographs, going by the witnesses’ depositions. PW 12 had stated that Venkubayamma was
about 70 years of age in the year 1970 itself, whereas Exs. A9 and A10 record her age as 70 years in
1982. Either way, the woman in Exs. A2 to A4 did not look close to those ages. In effect, there is no
clinching evidence to prove that the woman in the photographs was, in fact, Venkubayamma.

50. The actual ‘giving and taking’ of the child in adoption, being an essential requisite under Section
11(vi) of the Act of 1956, we find that there is no convincing evidence of that ‘act’ also in the case on
hand. Interestingly, there are no pictures of the actual ‘giving and taking’ of the child in adoption. In
Exs. A2 and A3, the purohit (PW 7) is seen standing or sitting behind the others and the same
cannot be taken to be during the ceremony of ‘giving and taking’, as he would have stood/sat in front
of them, chanting mantras and incantations as per shastras. Ex. A4 is a group photograph. Further,
there are no photographs of the datta homam, though PW 7 claimed that he had performed the
same. Even though it is no longer considered an essential ceremony, it is of significance when
performed, and would have been captured for posterity by taking pictures. Strangely, though a
professional photographer (PW 4) was stated to have been engaged for the purpose of taking
pictures at the adoption ceremony, he took only three photographs and no more. This parsimony is
not explained. Further, PW 1 producing and marking Ex. A8 receipt, supposedly issued by PW 4 to
the temple, with no explanation as to how it came into her possession, also does not inspire
confidence.

51. More importantly, the evidence of the purohit (PW 7), who is stated to have conducted the
ceremonies, leads to a doubt as to the very adoption having taken place. The adoption ceremony is
stated to have been performed at Sri Sri Raghunadha Swamy Temple at Bhapur in Berhampur but
as per PW 7, Raghunadha Swamy Temple is not even in Bhapur but in Chandramanipeta and only
Ramalingeswara Swamy and Mukteswara Swamy Temples are at Bhapur. Though, this discrepancy
is sought to be explained at this stage, the fact remains that there was no re-examination of PW 7 at
that time to clarify this telling aspect.

52. That apart, Ex. A9 Adoption Deed is scribed in English but it does not even contain a recital that
the contents thereof were read over and explained in Telugu to the executant. No evidence has been
let in for the Court to deduce that Venkubayamma was conversant with English language. Further,
and more significantly, in the second page of Ex. A9 Adoption Deed, Venkubayamma’s signature
reads thus: “Moturu bayammma’ and, thereafter, the word ‘Venku” was interjected above.
Underneath that signature, the signature ‘Moturu Venkubayamma’ is again affixed. It has come on
record that Venkubayamma was in the habit of signing in English as well as in Telugu. If so, it is

Moturu Nalini Kanth vs Gainedi Kaliprasad (Dead Through Lrs.) on 20 November, 2023

strange that she would not have signed her own name correctly on the second page and would have
left out ‘Venku’ altogether. Further, the misspelling of ‘bayamma’ as ‘bayammma’ is also strange and
significant.

53. Ex. A9 Adoption Deed records the age of Venkubayamma as 70 years and states that she was
desirous of taking a male child in adoption as she had no male issues. The document also records
that the adoptive child would perform the annual shraddha ceremonies and offering of Pinda and
water, as her natural son, to her ancestors. Nalini Kanth was aged less than a year when this
adoption deed was executed whereas the adoptive mother, going by the document itself, was aged 70
years. Being of that age, it is strange that Venkubayamma would have expected this toddler to
perform her obsequies after her death and such other ceremonies for her and her ancestors. Further,
it is difficult to believe that a woman of such advanced years would willingly take on the
responsibility of caring for an infant at that age.

54. Last but not the least, Ex. A9 Adoption Deed mentions that the adoption took place at Sri Sri
Raghunadha Swamy Temple but Ex. A10 Will records that Venkubayamma adopted the child with
the consent of his parents in the presence of relations at the house of his parents at
Chandramanipeta, Berhampur. Therefore, as per this document, the adoption took place, not at a
temple, but at the house of the natural parents, i.e., PW 2’s house. There is, thus, a contradiction
between Ex. A9 Adoption Deed and Ex. A10 Will as to the place where the adoption took place. An
attempt was made to discredit the scribe (PW 6) in this regard, but this disparity in the two
documents which were drawn up within a short span of time speaks for itself.

55. On the above analysis, we are of the opinion that the adoption of Nalini Kanth by
Venkubayamma on 18.04.1982 is not proved in accordance with law despite the registration of Ex.
A9 Adoption Deed dated 20.04.1982. The very adoption, itself, is not believable, given the multitude
of suspicious circumstances surrounding it. Nalini Kanth cannot, therefore, be treated as her heir by
adoption. Further, as Ex. A10 Will dated 03.05.1982 was also not proved in accordance with law, it
does not create any right in his favour. In consequence, Nalini Kanth is not entitled to claim any
right or share in Venkubayamma’s properties. The findings of the High Court to that effect, albeit for
reasons altogether different, therefore, do not warrant interference.

The judgment and decree of the High Court is confirmed. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Costs of this appeal, their own.

……………………….., J (C.T. RAVIKUMAR) ……………………….., J (SANJAY KUMAR) November 20,
2023;

New Delhi.