Ram Kishore vs Jai Singh & Ors. on 20 January, 2012

Ram Kishore vs Jai Singh & Ors. on 20 January, 2012

Author: Pradeep Nandrajog

Bench: Pradeep Nandrajog, Pratibha Rani

* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

% Date of Decision : 20th January, 2012

+ RFA(OS) 54/2008

RAM KISHORE ..... Appellant
Through: Mr.Munish Tyagi, Advocate.

versus

JAI SINGH & ORS. ....Respondents
Through: Mr.K.N.Popli, Advocate for R-2 to R-4.
Mr.Surendra Kumar, Advocate for R-4.
Mr.Anil Grover, Advocate and
Ms.Divya Jain, Advocate for R-9, R-10,
& R-16.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE PRATIBHA RANI

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)

1. Vide impugned judgment dated May 20, 2008, CS(OS) 375/2001 has been dismissed on two
reasons. The first reason is the finding return that the suit seeking partition of land in village Alipur
was not maintainable in view of the decision of the Supreme Court reported as 1970 (2) SCC 841
Hatti vs. Sunder Singh. The second reason is that no document was filed nor in the pleading any
reference was made to a document of title in the name of the ancestor on whose death partition was
prayed for.

2. Appellant Ram Kishore son of Jai Singh sought partition of five properties, delineated in site
plans marked „A(cid:129) to „E(cid:129) annexed with the plaint, on the plea that the great grand-father of the
plaintiff and the common ancestor of defendant No.1 to No.8 i.e. Mam Raj was the owner of the said
properties. Defendant No.9 to No.16 were impleaded inasmuch as certain portions of the properties,
of which partition was sought, had purchased the same from defendants No.1 to No.8.

3. It is pleaded in the plaint, as per para 8, that the total land, at different sites, as reflected in the
plans marked „A(cid:129) to „E(cid:129), ad-measures 5849 sq.yds. In para 12, it is pleaded that the plot as per plan
marked „A(cid:129) ad-measures 206 sq.yds. In para 13, it is pleaded that the plot as per plan marked „B(cid:129)
ad-measures 408 sq.yds. In para 14, it is pleaded that the largest plot as per plan marked „C(cid:129)

Ram Kishore vs Jai Singh & Ors. on 20 January, 2012

ad-measures 4530 sq.yds. In para 24 and para 25 it is pleaded that the plots ad- measuring 550
sq.yds and 200 sq.yds. are as per site plan marked „D(cid:129) and „E(cid:129).

4. It needs to be highlighted that in the plaint, we do not find any averment on the point: Whether
the aforesaid lands are within the abadi site of the village or are constituting land within the holding
of late Mam Raj. Qua land as per plan marked „C(cid:129), averments in para 14 read as follows: „That
bigger property adjacent to Phirni was also ancestral plot measuring 4530 sq. yds. covered with
Boongas, thorny bushes, Sarkandas and wild plants. The said property is shown in site plan marked
„C(cid:129) attached to the plaint.(cid:129)

5. If not for others, pertaining to the plot of land as per plan marked „C(cid:129), it is apparent that the land
in question is agricultural land. We say so for the reason it is pleaded in para 14 that the said land is
adjacent to phirni and is covered with boongas, thorny bushes, sarkandas and wild plants. It is not
pleaded that the said land is within the phirni. We all understand that the phirni is the boundary
within which the village abadi exists.

6. In the plaint reference has been made to two plots ad-measuing 120 sq.yd. and 130 sq.yd. in para
6, and in respect of said two plots it is stated that they are situated in the abadi of village Alipur in
Khasra No.894 (No claim to partition these lands has been made and it appears that the intention to
plead said facts is to show that when the settlement took place in the year 1908, these two plots were
allotted within the phirni comprised in Khasra No.894). With respect to the five lands as per plans
marked „A(cid:129) to „E(cid:129), in respect whereof partition is sought, no averment has been made as to in
which khasra these lands are situate. There are no averments that these lands are within the village
abadi site or whether these lands are agricultural lands. In which khasra number these lands are
situate? Nothing has been stated. In which settlement record it stands recorded that Mam Raj was
the owner of these lands, has not been pleaded.

7. Section 55 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 confers the power upon a bhoomidar to sue for
partition of a holding. Land has been defined in Sub-Section 13 of Section 3 of the Delhi Land
Reforms Act 1954 as under:-

"(13) "land" except in sections 23 and 24, means land held or occupied for purpose
connected with agriculture, horticulture or animal husbandry including pisciculture
and poultry farming and includes -

(a) Buildings appurtenant thereto,

(b) Village abadis,

(c) Grovelands,

(d) Lands for village pasture or land covered by water and used for growing singharas
and other produce or land in the bed of a river and used for casual or occasional
cultivation, But does not include -

Ram Kishore vs Jai Singh & Ors. on 20 January, 2012

land occupied by building in belts or areas adjacent to Delhi town, which the Chief Commissioner
may be a notification in the Official Gazette declare as an acquisition thereto;"

8. Holding has been defined in Sub-Section 11(a) as under:-

"[(11a)"holding means -

(a) In respect of -

(i) Bhumindar or Asami; or

(ii) Tenant or sub-tenant under the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887, or the Agra Tenancy
Act, 1901; or

(iii) Lessee under the Bhoodan Yagna Act, 1955, a parcel or parcels of land held under
one tenure, lease, engagement or grant; and

(b) In respect of proprietors, a parcel or parcels of land held as "sir or khudkasht"]"

9. It is thus apparent that a holding would be included within the definition of land and not
vice-versa i.e. the definition of land is wider than that of a holding.

10. Section 55 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 confers the power on a bhoomidar to sue for
partition of a holding. There is no provision in the Act for partition of land. Thus, only such lands as
constitute a holding are liable to be partitioned as per the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 and for
other lands, obviously, the right to seek partition has to be before a Civil Court.

11. Section 185 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 reads as under:-

"185. Cognizance of suits, etc., under this Act -

(1) Except as provided by or under this Act no court other than a court mentioned in
column 7 of Schedule I shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), take cognizance of any suit, application, or proceedings
mentioned in column 3 thereof.

(2) Except as hereinafter provided no appeal shall lie from an order passed under any of the
proceedings mentioned in column 3 of the Schedule aforesaid.

(3) An appeal shall lie from the final order passed by a court mentioned in column 3 to the court or
authority mentioned in column 8 thereof.

(4) A second appeal shall lie from the final order passed in an appeal under sub-section (3) to the
authority, if any, mentioned against it in column 9 of the Schedule aforesaid."

Ram Kishore vs Jai Singh & Ors. on 20 January, 2012

12. Thus, as per the said Section, Revenue Courts alone would have jurisdiction to take cognizance of
suits which are mentioned in Column „7(cid:129) of Schedule „I(cid:129) of the Act. Entry 11 under Schedule „I(cid:129)
lists, in Column „7(cid:129), the Court of the Revenue Assistant as the Court where „Suit for Partition of
Holding of a Bhoomidar(cid:129) can be filed.

13. It is clear that the bar under Section 185 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954 would apply only to
partition of such lands as constitute a holding of a bhoomidar and not the abadi lands in a village.

14. The sweeping observations made by the learned Single Judge, without analyzing as aforesaid,
lays down an incorrect law and to that extent impugned judgment and decree is set aside. However,
noting that the pleadings are vague and that qua land as per plan marked „C(cid:129) there is clarity of the
said land being within the holding, the suit would not be maintainable in respect of said land in any
case. Qua the remainder land, on account of vagueness in pleading and additionally for the reason
there is no averment regarding the settlement record where Mam Raj is recorded as the owner of the
lands, we concur with the view taken that on said reasoning the suit is liable to be dismissed. In the
decision reported as AIR 1999 SC 1464 D.M.Deshpande vs. Janardhan Kashinath Kadam, the
Supreme Court clearly laid down that issues cannot be settled on vague pleadings and that if there is
no concise statement of a material fact in either pleading i.e. in the plaint or the written statement,
the said plea has to be ignored. We would be failing not to note that in Delhi it has become a practice
of many unscrupulous elements to file collusive suits for partition with respect to gaon sabha land
and then enforce the collusive decrees through Court processes to gain possession of gaon sabha
lands. Thus, Courts have to be vigilant when such suits are filed and where the plaint does not
disclose the relevant revenue record where a bhoomidari or a possessory right of a person is
recorded.

Such suits are liable to be dismissed at the threshold on account of vague pleadings. Where a party
claims a particular land to be ancestral, a concise statement of material facts, needed to maintain the
action has to include a statement in the pleading as to in which record the ownership, bhoomidari or
possessory right is recorded.

15. Clarifying on the law as aforesaid but agreeing with the final decision arrived at, the appeal is
dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.

(PRADEEP NANDRAJOG) JUDGE (PRATIBHA RANI) JUDGE JANUARY 20, 2012 dk