Shri Nitin Garg vs Sh. Naresh Arora on 13 January, 2012

Shri Nitin Garg vs Sh. Naresh Arora on 13 January, 2012

Author: Indermeet Kaur

Bench: Indermeet Kaur

* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

% Date of Judgment: 13.01.2012

+ C.R.P. 03/2012 & CM No. 783/2012

SHRI NITIN GARG ........... Petitioner.
Through: Mr. Shiv Charan Garg,
Advocate.

Versus

SH. NARESH ARORA ..........Respondent
Through: Nemo.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE INDERMEET KAUR

INDERMEET KAUR, J. (Oral)

1. Order impugned before this Court is the order dated 08.09.2011 vide which the application filed
by the defendant under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the
„Code(cid:129)) seeking a rejection of the plaint had been declined.

2. Contention of the plaintiff was that the prayers as made in the plaint cannot be granted and as
such the plaint clearly discloses no cause of action. Perusal of the record shows that the present suit
is a suit for permanent and mandatory injunction. There are eight prayers mentioned in the said
plaint; they read as under:-

"A. That grant a decree of permanent injunction in favour of the plaintiff and against
the defendant thereby restraining the defendants, their agents, labour etc. from
demolishing the latrine and bath on the ground floor of the property No. 29/2,
Nangia Park, Shakti Nagar, Delhi along with costs of the suit. B. That a decree of
mandatory injunction may kindly be passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendant, thereby directing the defendant to reconstruct the latrine and bathroom of
size 16(cid:129)X4(cid:129) at their original position in the premises No. 29/2, Nangia Park, Shakti
Nagar, Delhi shown as red colour in the site plan attached with the original suit,
immediately in the interest of justice.

Shri Nitin Garg vs Sh. Naresh Arora on 13 January, 2012

C. That the defendants be directed to demolish the wall constructed blocking the door
shown in the site plan on the north east portion of the shop. In case the defendants
fail to demolish the said door, the same be got demolished by this Hon(cid:129)ble Court.

D. That the portion shown as open courtyard in the site plan annexed to plaint be
directed to be restores as open courtyard and roof covering be directed to be
demolished. In case of failure on the part of the defendants to do so, the Hon(cid:129)ble
Court get the same demolished.

E. That the portion shown as toitel/bath be directed to be restored to the original
position with length and breadth of 4(cid:129)X16(cid:129) with a door in the bath to the open
courtyard and a door in toilet toward the passage. In case the defendants failed to
comply with these directions, this may kindly be got done by the Hon(cid:129)ble Court.

F. That the defendants, their agents, etc. be restrained from interfering with the user
by the plaintiff, his servants etc. of the latrine and bath as it existed at the time of
inception of tenancy i.e. 16(cid:129)X4(cid:129) with door towards courtyard in the latrine bath
portion and also the door towards courtyard in the shop portion.

G. That the defendants be directed to reconstruct the naali which took the water of
the shop up to service lane and was running adjoining kitchen portion, bathroom
portion. In case the defendants fail to do so, the naali be got constructed in execution
of the decree in the presence of Local Commissioner or Bailiff or through such other
agency as may be considered appropriate by Hon(cid:129)ble Court.

H. That any other and further relief as the Hon(cid:129)ble Court deems fit in the
circumstances of the case may also be awarded."

3. The submission of the petitioner that the bar of Section 45 of the Delhi Rent Control Act
(hereinafter referred to as the „DRCA(cid:129)) bars the present suit is an argument without merit; prayers
made in the present plaint do not all make reference to the „essential supply of service(cid:129) which has
been explained in explanation 1 of Section 45 of the DRCA; the averments made in the plaint
coupled with the prayers show that all the prayers are not covered within the ambit of this
explanation 1. It is settled law that to deal with the application under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code it is
only the averments made in the plaint which have to be read and not the defence set up by the
defendant. Cause of action has clearly been deciphered. Impugned order suffers from no infirmity.

4. Dismissed.

INDERMEET KAUR, J JANUARY 13, 2012 A