Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

V i v e k K a i s t h v s T h e S t a t e O f H i m a c h a l P r a d e s h o n 2 0
November, 2023

Author: Sudhanshu Dhulia

Bench: Sudhanshu Dhulia, C.T. Ravikumar

2023 INSC 1007 REPORTABLE

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.6233-6234 OF 2023
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NOS.15522-15523 OF 2021)

VIVEK KAISTH & ANR. …APPELLANTS
Versus
THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH & ORS. …RESPONDENTS

WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO.6236 OF 2023
(@ SLP(C) No.2464/2022)

CIVIL APPEAL NO.6235 OF 2023
(@ SLP(C) No.21162/2021)

CIVIL APPEAL NO.6237 OF 2023
(@ SLP(C) No.4873/2022)

JUDGMENT

SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.

1. The appellants before this Court have challenged the Judgment dated 20.09.2021 passed by the
Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh (in Civil Appeal Nos.6233-6234 of 2023,
Vivek Kaisth and Akansha Dogra respectively), by which the appointment of the appellants to the
post of Civil Judge (Junior Division) has been quashed. There are presently four appeals before us.
The other three appeals are of the appellants (in connected appeals), who were also candidates for
the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division) for the year 2013 in the State of Himachal Pradesh, and
have also challenged the selection process as well as the appointment of the present appellants,
though for different reasons. We propose to dispose of these appeals by a common order. All the
same, when we refer to the facts in the present case, our reference would be confined to the facts as
contained in Civil Appeal No.6233 of 2023 and Civil Appeal No.6234 of 2023.

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

2. An advertisement was issued on 1st February, 2013 whereby the Himachal Pradesh Public Service
Commission (hereinafter referred to as “State Commission”), invited applications from eligible
candidates against eight vacancies for the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division) in Himachal Pradesh
Judicial Service. Out of the total eight vacancies, six were “existing vacancies” and two were
“anticipated vacancies”. The preliminary examination for these posts was held on 12.05.2013 of
which the results were declared on 15.06.2013. The candidates, who had qualified preliminary
examination participated in the main written examination which was held between 15th July, 2013
to 18th July, 2013. Eighty candidates qualified in the written examination and were ultimately called
for the interview, which was held on 07th and 08th October, 2013. Finally, following candidates
were selected and the list was published on the website of the Commission and in the newspaper on
08.10.2013. It is as under:

Sr. No. Roll No. Name of the Candidate Category Clear Cut Vacancies

1. 1025 Ms. Anshu Chaudhary General

2. 2006 Sh. Nishant Verma Sch. Caste

3. 1670 Ms. Pratibha Negi Sch. Tribe

4. 2185 Ms. Anita Sharma Sch. Tribe

5. 2172 Sh. Baljeet O.B.C.

6. 1431 Sh. Jitender Kumar O.B.C. Anticipated Vacancies

1. 1126 Ms. Abha Chauhan General

2. 1319 Sh. Ajay Kumar General

3. The names of the two appellants who are before this Court, did not figure in the
above list and their names were included later vide notification dated 27.12.2013
issued by the State Government. Himachal Pradesh High Court has held these two
selections, and consequently the appointments to be illegal and these have been
quashed. These two appellants are now before us in challenge to the judgement of the
High Court dated 20.09.2021.

We have to examine the validity of the selection and appointment of these two appellants to the post
of Civil Judge (Junior Division), and whether they should now be unseated from their judicial office.

4. After the publication of the results for the eight vacancies on 08.10.2013, as referred above, an
exercise was evidently undertaken at the level of the State Government, where an information was
sought from the Registrar General of the Himachal Pradesh High Court as to the correct position of
existing vacancies in the state judicial service in the cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division). This

letter dated 19.10.2013 is as under: -

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

“No. Home-B(B)6-4/2006-VI-6 Government of Himachal Pradesh Department
Home From:

The Additional Chief Secretary (Home) to the Government of Himachal Pradesh
Shimla-171001.

Dated: 19th October, 2013 Sub: Recommendation to the posts of Civil Judge (Jr.
Division) in the light of the directions dated 04.01.2007 of Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Malik Mazhar Sultan’s case.

Sir, I am directed to refer to the subject cited above and to enclose herewith a copy of letter
Number3- 50/2012-PSC(E-I) dated 11 October, 2013 received from Secretary, HP Public Service
Commission vide which select list of 08 candidates (06 against clear cut and 02 against anticipated
vacancies) for the appointment as Civil Judge (Jr. division) has been sent to this department. Before
proceeding further in this behalf, you are requested, on the administrative side, kindly to send
category wise details of all existing vacancies in the cadre of Civil Judge (Jr. Division) to this
department at the earliest.

Yours faithfully, Enclosures: As above [Devinder Saraswati] Deputy Secretary (Home) to the
Government of Himachal Pradesh Phone No. 0177-2626450”

5. In its reply the Registrar General of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh vide its letter dated
30.10.2013 addressed to the Additional Chief Secretary (Home) to Government of Himachal
Pradesh wrote as under: -

“……….

With reference to your letter No. Home-B(B)6/2006-VI-6-74 dated 19.10.2013, on
the captioned subject, I have been directed to inform you that the existing vacancy
position in the cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division) is as under:-

Sr. Category Roster Number of
No. Point Vacancies
1 UR 42, 29, 6
30, 55,
56 and

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

It is informed that Roster Point No. 55, 56, 11 were not included in the requisition of
the posts to be notified during 2013 by the Registry as that post has fallen vacant on
18.04.2013 due to creation of two new pots of Civil Judges (Jr. Division) at Solan and
Amb and one post due to discharge from service of Shri Sunish Aggarwal, Civil Judge
(Junior Division)-cum-JMIC, AMMI on 19.09.2013.”

6. A meeting was meanwhile held at the State level on 21.10.2013 to discuss the selection of Judicial
Officers in the ongoing process of 2013 and the number of vacancies on which such selection could
be made. The meeting which was held on 21.10.2013, was attended by the following officers: -

1. Sh. A.C. Dogra, Registrar General, High Court of Himachal Pradesh

2. Sh. Sandeep Bhatnagar, IAS, Secretary, Himachal Pradesh Public Service
Commission

3. Sh. Devinder Saraswati, Deputy Secretary (Home) to the Government of Himachal
Pradesh

7. As we can see, in the said meeting, officers nominated by the Government of
Himachal Pradesh, State Public Service Commission and the High Court of Himachal
Pradesh were present. This Committee (we will refer to it as Committee, only for the
sake of convenience), notes that earlier only 8 candidates were included in the select
list, though a few more should have been included, considering the vacancies in view
of the directions of the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Shweta Dhingra v. State of
H.P. & Ors. (2011) SCC OnLine HP 3566. It then recommended that Akansha Dogra
and Vivek Kaisth who are in the merit list of candidates in the general category and
Meenakshi and Parvez who are in the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe category
respectively should also be included in the select list.

8. The logic was that that recommendations have been made for only existing and
anticipated vacancies, whereas it ought to have been made for additional posts, which
would be 2/3rd of the actual and anticipated vacancies as directed in Shweta Dhingra
(supra).

The minutes of the meeting dated 21.10.2013 read as under:

“The contents of judgment in CWP No. 3135/20111 were gone through wherein it has
been directed that the H.P. Public Service Commission will publish a revised Select
List of the candidates from the year 2010 merit list by including 2/3 of the actual and
anticipated vacancies. It was further directed that the Hon’ble High Court, Govt. of
H.P. and the H.P. Public Service Commission shall jointly take up the exercise of
preparation of select list immediately after the publication of the merit list and this
exercise shall be completed within two weeks of the publication of the merit list every
year.

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

2. The Govt. (in the Department of Home) has sent a requisition for filling up 08
vacancies of Civil 1 Shweta Dhingra vs State of Himachal Pradesh [(2011) SCC
OnLine HP 3566] dated 03.09.2011 Judge (Jr. Division) for 2013. The category-wise
break up of vacancies is as under: -

Clear Cut Vacancies: - 06 (General-01, SC-01, ST-02 & OBC-02) Anticipated
Vacancies: - 02 (General)

3. On completion of the recruitment process of H.P. Judicial Service Examination,
2013 for filling up of the above mentioned vacancies, the H.P. Public Service
Commission prepared the result and published the merit list on the website of the
Commission and newspapers of 08.10.2013. The H.P. Public Service Commission
recommended the following candidates to the Govt. of H.P. on the publication of the
merit list: -

Sr. No. Roll No. Name of the Category
Candidate
Against Clear Cut Vacancies
1 1025 Ms. Anshu General
Chaudhary
2 2006 Sh. Nishant Sch. Caste
Verma
3 1678 Ms. Pratibha Negi Sch. Tribe
4 2185 Ms. Anita Sharma Sch. Tribe
5 2172 Sh. Baljeet OBC
6 1431 Sh. Jitender Kumar OBC
Against Anticipated Vacancies
1 1126 Ms. Abha General
Chauhan
2 1319 Sh. Ajay Kumar General

The result of HPJS Examination, 2013 was perused by the Committee and keeping in
view of the directions of Hon’ble High Court of H.P. to prepare the selection list by
including 2/3 of the actual and anticipated vacancies, Ms. Akanksha Dogra, Roll No.
20969, Sh. Vivek Kaisth, Roll No. 1299 candidates of general category, Ms.
Meenakshi, Roll No. 1386 (Sch. Caste Category) and Sh. Parvez, Roll No.1139 (Sch.
Tribe Category) can be kept in the select list as no other candidate from OBC category
had qualified the HPJS Examination – 2013. Accordingly, it was decided to include
the name(s) of Ms. Akanksha Dogra, Roll No. 2099, Sh.

Vivek Kaisth, Roll No. 1299 candidates of general category, Ms. Meenakshi, Roll No.1386 (Sch.
Caste Category) and Sh. Parvez, roll No. 1139 (Sch. Tribe Category) candidates in the select list and
the Commission should publish the select list accordingly.”

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

9. In Shweta Dhingra (supra) the Division Bench of the Himachal Pradesh High Court was dealing
with the selection of Civil Judge (Junior Division) in the State for the year 2010, and it was of the
opinion that apart from clear and anticipated vacancies, the Commission should prepare a select list
of some additional candidates. This entire exercise therefore for the appointment of few more
judicial officers was done in the present case, with the belief that this is what ought to have been
done in terms of the directions of the Himachal Pradesh High Court in Shweta Dhingra (supra), and
we must therefore reproduce the directions given in that case. We reproduce most of this order in
order to get a proper perspective:

2. The Apex Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) v. Uttar Pradesh Service Commission
has issued the guidelines with regard to the filling up of the vacancies to the post of
Civil Judge (Junior Division) by direct recruitment.

The vacancies have to be notified by 15th January every year. The vacancies include existing
vacancies on account of retirement and future vacancies and which may arise on account of
promotion, death or otherwise. It is also held in the judgment that the select list will operate till the
select list for the subsequent year comes into operation.

Still further, it is directed that the select list should be published in the order of merit and should be
double of the vacancies notified. This direction was subsequently modified by the Apex Court by the
order dated 24th March, 2009 to the effect that the select list should contain the existing number of
vacancies and the anticipated vacancies for the succeeding year and should include some candidates
in the waiting list.

Unfortunately, the select list published by the Public Service Commission was only for the clear cut
vacancies of five and three anticipated. No doubt, the said list is in the order of merit. As far as the
facts of the instant cases are concerned, there is no dispute with regard to the select list on the
aspect of communal rotation, so that we need not go into that aspect at this stage, we may refer the
same for future guidelines later in this judgment.

3. …………..

4. Steps for recruitment for the year 2011 have already been initiated. We find that six clear cut
vacancies have been notified (2-SC, 2-ST and 2-OBC). Six are anticipated (2- General, 1-ST and
3-OBC). The Public Service Commission, it is expected would be publishing the select list by the end
of October, 2011. Therefore, the select list already prepared/to be duly prepared is to operate till the
select list of 2011 is published. There will be a direction to the High Court to intimate all the
available vacancies as on 15th October, 2011 to the Commission and the Government on or before
17th October, 2011. Steps for filling up for those vacancies shall be taken by the Commission and the
Government from the select list of 2010 and the appointments shall be made before 29th October,
2011.

5. It is informed that the select list happened to be limited to the clear cut vacancies and actual
number of anticipated vacancies in view of the directions already issued by the Government in

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

2008-09. We find that the Government had issued such instructions in order to avoid unnecessarily
(Sic unnecessary) litigation. But apparently, the Government has not taken note of directions issued
by the Apex Court, which is already referred to above. Therefore, there will be a direction to the
Public Service Commission to publish a revised select list of the candidates from the year 2010 merit
list by including 2/3 of the actual and anticipated vacancies.

6. The select list and the merit list are two concepts. The merit list is the list of candidates ranked
according to their score in the examination-cum-interview. The select list is one which is prepared
according to the communal roster.

7. Pursuant to the judgment of this Court in CWP No. 3828 of 2009, titled Hakikat v. State of H.P.,
the roster is now to be maintained by the High Court;

earlier it was maintained by the Government. Since the select list is to be published by the Public
Service Commission, there will be direction to the High Court, Government and the Public Service
Commission to jointly take up this exercise of preparation of select list immediately after the
publication of the merit list and this exercise shall be completed within two weeks of the publication
of the merit list, every year. Thereafter, the Public Service Commission shall publish the select list.

Once the select list is published, the appointment shall be strictly made according to the said list
prepared on the basis of merit- cum-communal rotation.”

10. The directions given by the Division Bench of the High Court in paragraphs 5 and 7 are
important. The first direction is regarding the additional vacancies, which were to be 2/3rd of the
actual and anticipated vacancies and second direction was the joint exercise to be undertaken by the
State Commission, State Government and the High Court in determining and filling these vacancies.
This also explains why the joint exercise was undertaken on 21.10.2013 by the three-member
Committee, which we have already referred to, in the preceding paragraphs.

11. What is not clear though, is why in addition to clear and anticipated vacancies further vacancies
i.e., 2/3rd of clear and anticipated vacancies were to be published. If that had to be a waiting list
then such a direction could not have been given after the selections were over. In any case, there was
no pressing urgency for picking new vacancies for the selection year 2013, after the selection was
over and result had been announced.

12. Be that as it may, in the case at hand, consequent to the joint meeting and the decision taken
therein the Additional Chief Secretary (Home) vide his letter dated 25.11.2013 wrote to the Secretary
Public Service Commission as under: -

“………………..

I am directed to refer to the letter No. 3- 50/2012-PSC(E-1) dated 11th October, 2013
on the subject cited above and to say that as per this Department requisition 8 (eight)
posts of Civil Judge (Jr. Division)-cum-JMIC has been recommended by the

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

Commission. In the meantime, 2 (two) additional post of (Jr. Division)-cum-JMIC
has been created for Civil Court at Solan and Amb (Una).

Besides, one Civil Judge-(Jr. Division)- cum-JMIC, Amit was dismissed from the
Government service on 19.09.2013. As such three more posts of (Jr. Division) have
b e c o m e a v a i l a b l e i n t h e D e p a r t m e n t . A s p e r h i s l e t t e r N o .
HHC/GAZ/14-49/74-VI-30012 dated 30th October, 2013 (photocopy enclosed for
ready reference) the Registrar General, H.P. High Court has informed that roster
point 55, 56 & 11 were not included in the previous requisition of the posts to be
notified during the year 2013 by the Registry of Hon’ble High Court.

Keeping in view of above position you are requested to sponsor three more
candidates from the select list against roster point 55, 56 & 11 from the unreserved
category at the earliest.”

13. Ultimately, however, only two names from the general category who were next in the order of
merit were made available for the select list which were of Vivek Kaisth and Akansha Dogra
(appellants before this Court), who were recommended for appointment as Civil Judge (Jr. Division)
by the State Public Service Commission. Appointment letters were thereafter issued to the
appellants on 27.12.2013 and they were appointed as Civil Judge (Jr. Division) under the general
category. The two appellants were then sent for training in the judicial academy. The Himachal
Pradesh High Court subsequently posted them as Civil Judge (Jr. Division) in different districts.
After completing their period of probation and having completed around 9 years of service as Civil
Judge (Jr. Division), both the appellants have also been promoted to the next higher post of Civil
Judge (Sr. Division), which was done on 23.03.2023.

14. The first question which comes to our mind is whether the directions of the Himachal Pradesh
High Court in Shweta Dhingra (supra), were at all in line with the decision of this Court in Malik
Mazhar Sultan (3) and Another v. U.P. Public Service Commission and Others (2008) 17 SCC 703
(hereafter referred to as “Malik Mazhar”). We will discuss that in a while, but since at the root of it
all lies the directions given by this court in Malik Mazhar, it would be necessary at this stage to refer
to this decision of the Apex Court in order to get a clear perspective of the matter.

The main purpose for the directions given by this Court in Malik Mazhar was to timely fill judicial
vacancies in the States. This Court had fixed a time period to be followed by each High Court so that
the existing judicial vacancies are filled without any delay. Judicial services in States start from the
cadre of Civil Judge (Junior Division), who are also called Judicial Magistrates, when they work on
the criminal side. In Malik Mazhar, it was directed that all “vacancies” of Civil Judge (Junior
Division) shall be notified by the 15th January of that year. The vacancies were to be as follows: -

“(a) Existing vacancies.

(b) Future vacancies that may arise within one year due to retirement.

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

(c) Future vacancies that may arise due to promotion, death or otherwise, say ten per
cent of the number of posts.” The third category which was the “future vacancies”,
that may come due to reasons other than retirement, were to be 10% of the cadre
strength, as this was clarified in the judgment.

“We further direct that ten per cent of unforeseen vacancies would be in respect of sanctioned posts
and not vacancies occurring in a particular year.” Then there was a timeline for receiving the
applications, holding preliminary examination, main examination and prompt declaration of results
and also viva voce to be held between 1st October to 15th October. By 1st November, the results were
to be declared and appointment letters were to be issued. Latest by 2nd January, the incumbent
must join the post.

15. The following was the time table drawn by the Supreme Court in Malik Mazhar, for making these
appointments:

“For appointment to the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division) by direct recruitment
S.No. Description Date 1 Number of vacancies to be notified by the High Court. 15th
January Vacancies to be calculated including

(a) Existing vacancies.

(b) Future vacancies that may arise within one year due to retirement

(c) Future vacancies that may arise due to promotion, death or otherwise, say ten per cent of the
number of posts. 2 Advertisement inviting applications from eligible candidates. 1st February 3 Last
date for receipt of application 1st March 4 Publication of list of eligible applicants. 2nd April The list
may be put on the website.

5 Dispatch/Issue of admit cards to the eligible applicants. 2nd to 30th April 6 Preliminary written
examination 15th May Objective questions with multiple choice which can be scrutinised by
computer.

7 Declaration of result of preliminary written examination 15th June

(a) Result may be put on the website and also published in the newspaper.

(b) The ratio of 1:10 of the available vacancies to the successful candidates be maintained 8 Final
written examination 15th July Subjective/Narrative.

9 Declaration of result of final written examination 30th August

(a) Result may be put on the website and also published in the newspaper.

(b) The ratio of 1:3 of the available vacancies to the successful candidates be maintained.

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

(c) Dates of interview of the successful candidates may be put on the internet which can be printed
by the candidates and no separate intimation of the date of interview need be sent. 10 Viva voce. 1st
to 15th October 11 Declaration of final select list and communication to the appointing 1st authority
November

(a) Result may be put on the website and also published in the newspaper.

(b) Select list be published in order of merit and should be double the number of vacancies notified.

12 Issue of appointment letter by the competent authority for all 1st
existing vacant posts as on date. December

13 Last date for joining. 2nd January
of the
following
year

16. The Court further requested the Chief Justice of each High Court to constitute a committee of
two or three Judges to monitor the selection process so that timely selection of judicial officers can
be made. There were other directions as well. The difficulty, however, was to figure out the number
of vacancies to be advertised. As far as (a) existing vacancies and (b) future vacancies which were to
come within one year due to retirement were concerned, there was no difficulty in anticipating these
vacancies. It is the third category which was given in “C” as “future vacancies” that created some
confusion in different States as there could be no clarity of what these vacancies would be or how
they were to be calculated. Ultimately, a three Judge Bench of this Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan
and Another v. Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission and Others (2009) 17 SCC 24 (hereafter
referred to as “Malik Mazhar-2”) clarified this aspect in its order dated 24.03.2009 as follows:

“1. On 4-1-2007 [Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) v. U.P. Public Service Commission, (2008)
17 SCC 703 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 942] , this Court had given certain directions
regarding the selection and appointment of members of the subordinate judicial
officers in various courts. In the tabular form, the number of vacancies are notified by
the High Court/Public Service Commission. It was directed that the further vacancies
that may arise due to elevation or death or otherwise, 10% of the posts shall be
notified and this is referred at para 15 of the order; it is further stated: (Malik Mazhar
case [Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) v. U.P. Public Service Commission, (2008) 17 SCC 703
: (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 942] , SCC p. 711) “15. We further direct that ten per cent of
unforeseen vacancies would be in respect of sanctioned posts and not vacancies
occurring in a particular year.”

2. It has been pointed out by the counsel appearing for the various High Courts that
10% of the sanctioned posts are notified in some States. A large number of posts are
to be notified whereas there was corresponding number of vacancies to be filled if the

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

candidates are selected in the select list. There may be an expectation for such
candidates to get appointment and this creates unwanted litigation by the candidates
and it is prayed that the existing vacancies alone be notified along with the
anticipated vacancies that may arise in the next one year and some candidates also be
included in the wait list prepared by the High Courts/PSCs.

3. In supersession of the order passed by this Court on 4-1-2007 [Malik Mazhar
Sultan (3) v. U.P. Public Service Commission, (2008) 17 SCC 703 : (2010) 1 SCC
(L&S) 942] , this Court directs that in future the High Courts/PSCs shall notify the
existing number of vacancies plus the anticipated vacancies for the next one year and
some candidates also be included in the wait list. To this extent earlier order is
modified.” (emphasis supplied)

17. In other words, subsequent to the clarification by a three Judge Bench of this
Court in Malik Mazhar-2, the third category earlier created in Malik Mazhar, did not
exist any longer. Therefore, the directions given by the Division Bench of the
Himachal Pradesh High Court in Shweta Dhingra (supra) in our opinion, were not
necessary, and the reliance upon these directions by the threemember Committee in the present case were misplaced since the ‘vacancies’ had already been
advertised. If at all, it was necessary such an exercise should have been undertaken before the
vacancies were advertised on 01.02.2013.

18. We may also refer here to the 2004 Rules of Himachal Pradesh known as Himachal Pradesh
Judicial Service Rules, 2004. The Rules were amended to bring them in tune with the directions of
this Court in Malik Mazhar. After the amendment, the number of vacancies which were to be
notified as per the Himachal Pradesh Judicial Service Rules were as follows:

(a) existing vacancies;

(b) future vacancies that may arise within one year due to retirement; and

(c) future vacancies that may arise due to promotion, death or otherwise, say ten
percent of the number of posts.

The clarification made by this Court about the number of vacancies to be notified in Malik Mazhar-2
was perhaps not noticed while making changes in the above Rules. As such, the vacancies as given in
the 2004 Rules are not in tune with what this Court had defined as ‘vacancies’ in terms of Malik
Mazhar-2. In any case if more vacancies had to be advertised, over and above the existing and
anticipated vacancies then this could only have been done prior to the advertisement i.e., February
1, 2013.

19. All the same, even if there is an apparent dichotomy between what the Service Rules suggest and
what is mandated by this Court in Malik Mazhar this must be resolved by making a harmonious

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

interpretation between the Service Rules and Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, as held
by this Court in High Court of Kerala v. Reshma A. and Others (2021) 3 SCC

755. The importance of the Service Rules cannot be belittled. The directions given in Malik Mazhar
too emphasise that appointments have to be made as per the Service Rules of each State, as the
procedure of selection and appointment may vary between different states. This Court was
conscious of this aspect. The concern of this Court was for timely recruitment to fill the judicial
vacancies. Removing any doubt on a conflict between the directions in Malik Mazhar and Service
Rules, this Court in Reshma A. (supra) explained as under:

“59. …………. The object and purpose of this Court in the decision in Malik Mazhar (3)
[Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) v. U.P. Public Service Commission, (2008) 17 SCC 703] was
to ensure the expeditious filling up of judicial vacancies in the State Judicial Services.
It was in this perspective, that the Court set down strict timelines for compliance. At
the same time, it is evident that the decision did not provide for essential aspects
such as eligibility, modalities for conducting the examination and the application of
reservations in making appointments to State Judicial Services. Hence, a significant
field in regard to the process of selection and appointments to the judicial services is
not covered by the decision in Malik Mazhar (3) [Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) v. U.P.
Public Service Commission, (2008) 17 SCC 703] for which one has to fall back upon
construing the rules governing the State Judicial Service in question.” In Malik
Mazhar, this Court had dealt with any probable conflict of duties on interference with
the independent functioning of State Commissions where it reiterated its sole
purpose of timely filling up of judicial vacancies. This is what it said:

“6. Though no submission was made by any learned counsel appearing for any State
Government that the constitution of Selection Committee by the Chief Justice of the
High Court to monitor the timely appointment of Judges at subordinate/district level
would amount to interference with the independent functioning of the State Public
Service Commission, but some State Governments in their responses have indicated
so. In view of what we have already noted about the appointments to be made in
accordance with the respective Judicial Services Rules in the States, the apprehension
of interference seems to be wholly misplaced. A Committee constituted by the Chief
Justice of the High Court to ensure that the vacancies are timely filled and the
problem of delay in dispensation of justice is tackled to some extent can under no
circumstances be said to be interference with the independent functioning of the
authorities under the Rules or of independent functioning of the State Public Service
Commission.”

20. In Reshma A. (supra) while dealing with a situation where there was an almost
similar dichotomy between the Kerala Judicial Service Rules and the directions given
in Malik Mazhar, this Court was of the opinion that in such cases, it is better to seek
harmony between the two and held that “A better line of approach is to seek an
interpretation which will bring harmony between them.” Without going into the

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

details of the Reshma A. (supra) case, the problem which arose there was that the
Service Rules in Kerala required the “merit list” to be “twice” the number of
“probable vacancies”.

After the first half of the candidates from the list were given appointments on the notified vacancies,
the remaining candidates of the list, i.e., nearly half, claimed appointment on vacancies which came
subsequently i.e., subsequent to the notification of vacancies. The claim of these candidates was
based on a provision of Service Rules [Rule 7(2)]2 which stipulated that the list shall be valid for
“one year”, and therefore since the merit list was still a valid list, appointments could be made on
these vacancies, was the case of the petitioners before the Kerala High Court. Their claim 2 Rule 7
(2)“The merit list prepared by the High Court shall be forwarded for the approval of the Governor.
The list approved by the Governor shall come into force from the date of the approval and shall be
valid till the notified vacancies and the vacancies that may arise within one year from the date of
approval of the list, are filled up or a fresh list comes into force, whichever is earlier.” was accepted
by the learned Single Judge in writ petition as well as in Appeal before the Division Bench. The
Kerala High Court was thus here before this Court, in Reshma A (supra). Indeed, a literal
interpretation of sub-rule (2) of Rule 7 would give a right of consideration to the petitioners who
were before the Kerala High Court, but that would be against service jurisprudence as that would
amount to making appointments on vacancies which were not advertised, vacancies which came up
after the notified date on which would also rest the claim of such candidates who gained eligibility
subsequently and had a right of consideration. Hence, this exercise would principally be in violation
of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. This is how this Court resolved the issue:

“71.1. Undoubtedly, the validity of Rule 7(2) was not in question before the High
Court. The counsel for the respondents argued that it does not lie in the province of
the appellant to raise a doubt about the validity of its own rules, more particularly
Rule 7(2). It is necessary to note that Mr V. Giri, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellant did not suggest or argue that Rule 7(2) should be held to be
invalid. The submission of the learned Senior Counsel is that the expression
“probable” denotes an addition/deduction which has to be made due to the
imponderables of service such as death, resignation and promotion. The submission
of the appellant is that a literal interpretation of Rule 7(2), without reference to the
constitutional requirement of not operating a select list beyond the notified
vacancies, would render the Rule violative of Articles 14 and 16 and such an
interpretation should be avoided. In other words, his submission was that a
constitutional interdict cannot be overcome in the manner it has been suggested by
the respondents and a harmonious interpretation of the judicial service rules in the
light of the directions in Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) [Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) v. U.P.
Public Service Commission, (2008) 17 SCC 703 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 942] should
have been resorted to by the High Court. We are in agreement with this line of
submissions, based as it is on the precedent of this Court.

71.2. It is a settled principle of service jurisprudence that when vacancies are notified
for conducting a selection for appointments to public posts, the number of

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

appointments cannot exceed the vacancies which are notified. The answer to this
submission, which has been proffered by the respondents is that under Rule 7(1) a
probable number of vacancies is required to be notified and since an exact number is
not notified, there is no constitutional bar in exceeding the 37 probable vacancies that
were notified in 2019. The difficulty in accepting the submission is simply this : it
attributes to the expression “probable number of vacancies” a meaning which is
inconsistent with basic principles of service jurisprudence, the requirement of
observing the mandate of equality of opportunity in public employment under
Articles 14 and 16 and is contrary to the ordinary meaning of the expression. Black's
Law Dictionary [ 11th Edn.

(Thomson Reuters West, 2019).The definition of “Probable” in the 4th Edn., Revision 6 (1971) of the
Black's Law Dictionary was:“Having the appearance of truth; having the character of probability;
appearing to be founded in reason or experience …; having more evidence for than against;
supported by evidence which inclines the mind to believe, but leaves some room for doubt;
Apparently true yet possibly false.”] defines the expression “probable” as:

“Probable : likely to exist, be true, or happen” “Probable number of vacancies”, as we
have seen, is based on computing the existing vacancies and the vacancies anticipated
to occur during the year. It also accounts for the possibility of inclusion of some of the
candidates that are in the wait list. However, the expression “probable” cannot be
interpreted as a vague assessment of vacancies that is not founded in reason and can
be altered without a statutorily prescribed cause. To allow the concept of probable
number of vacancies in Rule 7(1) to trench upon future vacancies which will arise in a
succeeding year would lead to a serious constitutional infraction. Candidates who
become eligible for applying for recruitment during a succeeding year of recruitment
would have a real constitutional grievance that vacancies which have arisen during a
subsequent year during which they have become eligible have been allocated to an
earlier recruitment year. If the directions of the High Court are followed, this would
seriously affect the fairness of the process which has been followed by glossing over
the fact that vacancies which have arisen during 2020 will be allocated for candidates
in the select list for the year 2019. Such a course of action would constitute a serious
infraction of Articles 14 and 16 and must be avoided. 71.3. To reiterate, the
submission of the appellant which we are inclined to accept is not that Rule 7(2) is
invalid but that a harmonious interpretation of Rules 7(1) and (2) must be adopted
that is consistent with the Article 142 directions in Malik Mazhar Sultan (3) [Malik
Mazhar Sultan (3) v. U.P. Public Service Commission, (2008) 17 SCC 703 : (2010) 1
SCC (L&S) 942] to bring the rules in accord with the governing principles of
constitutional jurisprudence in matters of public employment.”

21. Appointments cannot be made over and above the vacancies which have been
advertised, except in an emergency situation or for some unforeseen reasons, in
public interest or when a policy decision is taken by the State Government in this
regard, as held by this court in Gujarat State Dy. Executive Engineers’ Assn. v. State

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

of Gujarat (1994) Supp 2 SCC 591.

22. In Hoshiyar Singh v. State of Haryana (1993) Supp. 4 SCC 377, this Court had
held that Public Service Commission cannot recommend more names than what have
been advertised and any appointment, which is made in excess to the vacancies,
which have been advertised would be arbitrary. The reason being that such
selection/appointment would deprive those candidates who are not eligible for
appointment at the time these posts were advertised but had become eligible in the
subsequent year would be deprived of competing against such posts. This decision
has been followed in a catena of other judgments by this Court.

Reference may be made here to some of these decisions, such as State of Bihar v. Secretariat Asstt.
Successful Examinees’ Union (1994) 1 SCC 126 and State of Bihar v. Madan Mohan Singh (1994)
Supp 3 SCC 308.

23. The common thread that runs in all the above judgments is that appointments cannot be made
over and above the vacancies which were advertised i.e., clear and anticipated vacancies, even
though the Public Service Commission may have prepared a longer merit list than it was required to
do.

24. In Malik Mazhar-2, this Court had directed that a waiting list of candidates should also be
prepared. Evidently in the present selection process there was no “waiting list”. There ought to have
been one. However, the absence of a waiting list has not caused any difficulty as all the eight
candidates who were selected gave their joining and were consequently appointed. The purpose of a
waiting list is that when selected candidates are unable to join the post for any reason whatsoever,
the post should not remain vacant and this shortfall of candidates can be met from the candidates
who are in the waiting list. The candidates who are in the waiting list have also qualified the
examination in every respect, but they are just lower down in the merit and for this reason they
could not make it to the final select list of candidates. But they are just short of it and that is why
they are in the waiting list. The purpose of a “waiting list” is only to fill the shortfall of “clear and
anticipated vacancies.”

25. What constitutes a “waiting list” and what its purpose is has been explained by this Court in
Gujarat State Dy. Executive Engineers’ Association (supra) as follows:

“8. Coming to the next issue, the first question is what is a waiting list?; can it be
treated as a source of recruitment from which candidates may be drawn as and when
necessary?; and lastly how long can it operate? These are some important questions
which do arise as a result of direction issued by the High Court. A waiting list
prepared in service matters by the competent authority is a list of eligible and
qualified candidates who in order of merit are placed below the last selected
candidate. How it should operate and what is its nature may be governed by the rules.
Usually it is linked with the selection or examination for which it is prepared. For
instance, if an examination is held say for selecting 10 candidates for 1990 and the

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

competent authority prepares a waiting list then it is in respect of those 10 seats only
for which selection or competition was held. Reason for it is that whenever selection
is held, except where it is for single post, it is normally held by taking into account
not only the number of vacancies existing on the date when advertisement is issued
or applications are invited but even those which are likely to arise in future within
one year or so due to retirement etc. It is more so where selections are held regularly
by the Commission. Such lists are prepared either under the rules or even otherwise
mainly to ensure that the working in the office does not suffer if the selected
candidates do not join for one or the other reason or the next selection or
examination is not held soon. A candidate in the waiting list in the order of merit has
a right to claim that he may be appointed if one or the other selected candidate does
not join. But once the selected candidates join and no vacancy arises due to
resignation etc. or for any other reason within the period the list is to operate under
the rules or within reasonable period where no specific period is provided then
candidate from the waiting list has no right to claim appointment to any future
vacancy which may arise unless the selection was held for it. He has no vested right
except to the limited extent, indicated above, or when the appointing authority acts
arbitrarily and makes appointment from the waiting list by picking and choosing for
extraneous reasons.

9. A waiting list prepared in an examination conducted by the Commission does not
furnish a source of recruitment. It is operative only for the contingency that if any of
the selected candidates does not join then the person from the waiting list may be
pushed up and be appointed in the vacancy so caused or if there is some extreme
exigency the Government may as a matter of policy decision pick up persons in order
of merit from the waiting list. But the view taken by the High Court that since the
vacancies have not been worked out properly, therefore, the candidates from the
waiting list were liable to be appointed does not appear to be sound.

This practice, may result in depriving those candidates who become eligible for competing for the
vacancies available in future. If the waiting list in one examination was to operate as an infinite
stock for appointments, there is a danger that the State Government may resort to the device of not
holding an examination for years together and pick up candidates from the waiting list as and when
required. The constitutional discipline requires that this Court should not permit such improper
exercise of power which may result in creating a vested interest and perpetrate waiting list for the
candidates of one examination at the cost of entire set of fresh candidates either from the open or
even from service.” This was reiterated by this Court in Surinder Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab &
Anr. (1997) 8 SCC 488:

“Candidates in the waiting list have no vested right to be appointed except to the
limited extent that when a candidate selected against the existing vacancy does not
join for some reason and the waiting list is still operative.”

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

26. In Rakhi Ray & Ors. v. High Court of Delhi & Ors. (2010) 2 SCC 637, the practice of making
appointments on future vacancies from the waiting list was held to be wrong. “In case the vacancies
notified stand filled up, the process of selection comes to an end. Waiting list, etc. cannot be used as
a r e s e r v o i r , t o f i l l u p t h e v a c a n c y w h i c h c o m e s i n t o e x i s t e n c e a f t e r t h e i s s u a n c e o f
notification/advertisement. The unexhausted select list/waiting list becomes meaningless and
cannot be pressed in service any more”3.

27. We are referring to the position of law on “waiting list” because one of the arguments of the
appellants (in connected appeals) before us is that, since in any case there was a direction in Malik
Mazhar-2 for having a “waiting list”, therefore the names of those two appellants ought to have been
considered as names from the “waiting list”. In our opinion, this cannot be done, as the question
would still remain whether selection/appointment can be made on vacancies, which were never
advertised, apart from the fact that this would in any case go against the very concept of a ‘waiting
list’ that we have explained above. The vacancies on which the appointments have been made could
not be anticipated Para 12 at the time of advertisement (February 1st, 2013), and hence these
vacancies were not advertised. These two vacancies were in fact, created on 18.03.2013 i.e., after the
notification of vacancies on 01.02.2013. These were the “future vacancies”, which earlier could fall
under the “C” category given in Malik Mazhar but were deleted in Malik Mazhar-2. These vacancies
technically could only be filled next year and should have been notified by January 15th, 2014 as per
the directions in Malik Mazhar. The argument of the appellants (in connected appeals), particularly
against the present appellants, that had there been a waiting list they could have been considered for
appointment in that category for these vacancies, in our opinion, is a complete misunderstanding of
the concept of a “waiting list”.

28. To sum up the position of law as it stands, once clear and anticipated vacancies have been
advertised, appointments can only be made on these vacancies. Vacancies which could not be
anticipated before the date of advertisement, or the vacancies which did not exist at the time of
advertisement, are the vacancies for the future i.e., next selection process. Malik Mazhar mandates
yearly selection/appointment on the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division). There is a time line fixed,
and ‘vacancies’ have to be declared on January 15th of each year. The process has to be completed by
October of the same year. Once this is followed, as it ought to be, the object sought to be achieved
(under the guidelines given in Malik Mazhar), of timely filling of judicial vacancies is achieved.

29. In the case at hand, it is clear that the appointment of the appellants (Vivek Kaisth and Akansha
Dogra) was made on posts which were not advertised and in fact did not even exist at the time when
the advertisement was made. The anomaly made in the selection/appointment of these two
candidates is quite apparent.

30. The appointment of the appellants was challenged before the Himachal Pradesh High Court by
respondent No.4 herein. Respondent No.4 (Shri Kuldeep Sharma), who was also one of the
candidates, in the merit list of candidates along with the appellants, obviously did not question the
existence of these two vacancies but only that these vacancies ought to have been advertised along
with the initial 8 vacancies. Initially, only three posts for general category candidates were
advertised, against which nine candidates were called for the interview, as per the Rules on 1:3 ratio

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

and he being low in the order of merit was not called for the interview. His argument was that, if five
posts were to be advertised as it ought to have been, then fifteen candidates would have been called
for the interview which would have included him and he therefore had a fair chance of making it to
the select list. According to him, the belated decision of the inclusion of two seats was not fair.
Respondent no. 4, however, in our opinion had no case for his appointment since these two
vacancies could not have been advertised earlier, as these vacancies did not exist at that time.
Similarly, another writ petition was also filed before the High Court claiming violation of reservation
etc. due to the inclusion of two seats! Their case was that the two Schedule Tribe candidates should
have been selected on the general seats, and the two seats vacated by them would have given to the
reserved candidates. The claim of these appellants (in connected appeals) for their appointments on
the posts is again based on the fact that these two vacancies ought to have been advertised earlier is
again wrong. The High Court has allowed the writ petition filed by respondent No.4 to the extent
that it held that the appointment of the appellants was in violation of the law in as much as they
were not appointed either on the existing vacancies or anticipated vacancies but they were
appointed on “future vacancies” which were never advertised. It is true that the vacancies which
were advertised were only 8, including those on the reserved posts. The High Court, however, did
not grant any relief to the present appellants, or the other candidates in other connected petitions.
Their writ petitions were dismissed.

31. In the preceding paragraphs of the present order, we have already clarified the position of law
and therefore, in our opinion, the High Court was right in holding this position, which is the settled
position of law. What the High Court missed was the context, the facts and the circumstances of the
case.

32. A Judge is a Judge of facts, as much as he is a Judge of law. The position of law we have already
explained in the preceding paragraphs, which has been correctly followed by the Himachal Pradesh
High Court. Now let us see the context of the case and its facts. Today, when we are delivering this
judgment the two appellants have already served as Judicial Officers for nearly 10 years. Meanwhile,
they have also been promoted to the next higher post of Civil Judge (Senior Division). In this
process of their selection and appointment (which has obviously benefitted them), nothing has been
brought to our notice which may suggest any favouritism, nepotism or so-called blame as to the
conduct of these two appellants, in securing these appointments. The High Court in fact notes this
factor. While placing the blame on the State Commission it records that “………. there is nothing on
record suggestive of the fact that any mala fides were behind the selection of respondents Nos.4 and
6……….”

33. The two appellants had qualified the examination and were in the merit list. Should we quash
their appointment and unseat them from judicial service, is the question. The same question was
there before the High Court and it expressed its inability to protect the appointment of the
appellants for two reasons. The first reason was that since it had determined a finding of illegality in
the appointment, it saw no reason to continue with these appointments on grounds of hardship and
equity, as that could only be done only under Article 142 of the Constitution of India and these
powers the High Court did not have. The second reason given was that in any case the balance of
equity would lie in favour of the petitioner (i.e. respondent No. 4 before High Court), and not the

present appellants. The reasons given were as follows :

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

“Having carefully perused aforesaid judgments rendered by Hon’ble Apex Court,
which have been otherwise taken note above this Court finds that though in the
aforesaid cases, selection of the petitioners therein was held to be not in accordance
with law but their selection was protected by Hon’ble Apex Court, while exercising
power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, which power is firstly not
available with this Court, and secondly, in the case at hand, there is active challenge
to the selection of the respondents Nos. 4 and 6 by the petitioners herein, whose
rights are equally important as that of the aforesaid respondents and, in case
respondents Nos. 4 and 6 are allowed to continue on their posts, same would result in
infringement of right of the petitioners to participate/being considered in the
selection process for the posts in question, and while balancing equalities, the party
which is fighting for a just cause, its right (Sic rights) are to be protected and not of
the party, which is beneficiary of an illegality committed by the selecting /appointing
authorities.”

34. The appellants were not entitled for any equitable relief in view of the High Court as they were
the beneficiaries of an illegality committed by the Selection/appointing authority. But then it failed
to take this question further, which in our opinion, it ought to have done. What the High Court
never answered was as to how much of this blame of “illegal” selection and appointment would rest
on the High Court (on its administrative side). Undoubtedly, with all intentions of timely filling of
the vacancies, the High Court still cannot escape the blame. From the very initiation of adding
future vacancies after the select list was published, the High Court has been privy to the
selection/appointment process. The decision of the three-member committee which included
representatives of the High Court (dated 21.10.2013) to initially add four more posts to the
vacancies, and the fact that the High Court never had any objection to the additional appointments,
although these appointments were made under its watch, are significant facts. After these
appointments were made, it was the High Court which posted these officers in different districts in
the State under Article 235 of the Constitution of India. It then trained them as Judicial Officers.
Not one note, letter, or an objection of any kind has been placed before us which can give even the
slightest hint that the High Court, at any point of time, had objected to these appointments! The
objection has only come for the first time in form of additional affidavits before the High Court in
the writ proceedings when the validity of these two appointments was challenged. The additional
affidavit filed by the Registrar General of the High Court before the Division Bench of the High
Court says that these appointments were not made in consultation with the High Court. This,
however, does not reflect the correct position, to say the least. The High Court has placed the entire
blame on the post selection exercise undertaken by the State Commission. This is not the correct
position, though undoubtedly the Commission as the selecting authority must ultimately bear the
brunt, yet the blame must be shared equally by the State Government and the High Court.

35. Having gone through the pleadings of the appellants and that of the respondents, we are of the
considered view that there has been a violation of the process in making selection/appointment of
the appellants, in as much as the vacancies on which the appellants were appointed were never

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

advertised, and strictly speaking these vacancies cannot be termed as “anticipated vacancies” for the
simple reason that these vacancies were only created on 18.04.2013 i.e. after the selection process
had begun and advertisement was issued on 01.02.2013.

36. What is also important for our consideration at this stage is that the appellants in the present
case have been working as Judicial Officers now for nearly 10 years. They are now Civil Judge
(Senior Division). These judicial officers now have a rich experience of 10 years of judicial service
behind them. Therefore, unseating the present appellants from their posts would not be in public
interest. Ordinarily, these factors as we have referred above, would not matter, once the very
appointment is held to be wrong. But we also cannot fail to consider that the appellants were
appointed from the list of candidates who had successfully passed the written examination and viva
voce and they were in the merit list. Secondly, it is nobody’s case that the appellants have been
appointed by way of favouritism, nepotism or due to any act which can even remotely be called as
“blameworthy”. Finally, they have now been working as judges for ten years. There is hence a special
equity which leans in favour of the appellants. In a recent Constitution Bench decision of this Court
in Sivanandan C.T. and Ors. v. High Court of Kerala and Ors. (2023) SCC OnLine SC 994 though the
finding arrived at by this Court was that the Rules of the game were changed by the High Court of
Kerala by prescribing minimum marks for the viva voce, which were not existing in the Rules and
therefore in essence the appointment itself was in violation of the Rules, yet considering that those
persons who had secured appointments under this selection have now been working for more than 6
years it was held that it would not be in public interest to unseat them. It was stated in Para 58 as
under: -

“58. The question which now arises before the Court is in regard to the relief which
can be granted to the petitioners. The final list of successful candidates was issued on
6 March 2017. The candidates who have been selected have been working as District
and Sessions Judges for about six years. In the meantime, all the petitioners who are
before the Court have not functioned in judicial office. At this lapse of time, it may be
difficult to direct either the unseating of the candidates who have performed their
duties. Unseating them at this stage would be contrary to public interest since they
have gained experience as judicial officers in the service of the State of Kerala. While
the grievance of the petitioners is that if the aggregate of marks in the written
examination and viva-voce were taken into account, they would rank higher than
three candidates who are respondents to these proceedings, equally, we cannot lose
sight of the fact that all the selected candidates are otherwise qualified for judicial
office and have been working over a length of time. Unseating them would, besides
being harsh, result in a situation where the higher judiciary would lose the services of
duly qualified candidates who have gained experience over the last six years in the
post of District Judge.” And therefore, one of the directions in the said case was as
under:

‘60. XXX XXX

Vivek Kaisth vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 20 November, 2023

(vi) In terms of relief, we hold that it would be contrary to the public interest to direct
the induction of the petitioners into the Higher Judicial Service after the lapse of
more than six years. Candidates who have been selected nearly six years ago cannot
be unseated. They were all qualified and have been serving the district judiciary of the
state. Unseating them at this stage would be contrary to public interest. To induct the
petitioners would be to bring in new candidates in preference to those who are
holding judicial office for a length of time. To deprive the state and its citizens of the
benefit of these experienced judicial officers at a senior position would not be in
public interest.” The case at hand is on a similar footing if not better than the
petitioners in the above case.

37. We therefore uphold the findings of the High Court on law as to the flaw in the process of
selection, which followed post October 8, 2013, after declaration of results. All the same, for the
reasons stated above, in order to do complete justice and in exercise of our powers under Article 142
of the Constitution of India, we set aside the order of the High Court as far as it quashes the
selection and appointment of the appellants. To that extent, these appeals succeed and are hereby
allowed.

38. As we have not touched the findings of the High Court on law and it was indeed the correct
position of law, the remaining Civil Appeals No. 6237 of 2023, 6235 of 2023 and 6236 of 2023 (filed
by Meenakshi, Parvez and Ashitosh Thakur respectively) are hereby dismissed.

39. We also make it clear that the present litigation which the appellants have gone through will not
come in way of these judicial officers in any manner, as far as their judicial career is concerned. They
shall be treated at par with the other appointees on the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division) for that
year. Pending applications, if any, are also disposed of.

..……….………………….J. [C.T. RAVIKUMAR] ...………………………….J. [SUDHANSHU DHULIA] New
Delhi.

November 20, 2023.