Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru.
Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

Author: Saurabh Lavania

Bench: Saurabh Lavania

HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH

Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:49429

Court No. - 11

Case :- CRIMINAL REVISION No. - 903 of 2025

Revisionist :- Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra Kumar Singh

Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. And Another

Counsel for Revisionist :- Himanshu Suryavanshi,Purnendu Chakravarty

Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.

Hon'ble Saurabh Lavania,J.

1. Shri Ashish Raman Mishra, Advocate, has put in appearance on behalf of opposite party no.2 by
way of filing his Vakalatnama, which is taken on record.

2. Heard Shri Purnendu Chakravarty, who appeared along with Shri Himanshu Suryavanshi,
learned counsel for the revisionist, Shri Ashish Raman Mishra, learned counsel for opposite party
no.2, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the material brought on record.

3. The present revision has been filed for the following main relief:-

"WHEREFORE, it is most respectfully prayed that in the aforesaid facts and
circumstances and grounds stated in this criminal revision, this Hon'ble Court may
kindly be pleased to allow the Criminal Revision and quash/set aside the impugned
order dated 24.07.2025 passed by the Ld. Court of Sessions Judge, Barabanki in
Sessions Case No.1915 of 2025 alongwith all consequential proceedings arising out of

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

FIR No. 454 of 2023 under Section 323, 504, 354-B, 452, 307 IPC, PS: Kotwali
Nagar, Barabanki with all consequential facts in the interest of justice."

4. Criminal Revision No. 896 of 2025 (Bhupendra Kumar Singh And 2 Others Versus State of U.P.
and Others) filed by co-accused has been dismissed by this Court vide order dated 19.08.2025,
which reads as under:-

"1. Shri Ashish Raman Mishra, Advocate, has put in appearance on behalf of opposite
party no.2 by way of filing his Vakalatnama, which is taken on record.

2. Heard Shri Purnendu Chakravarty who appeared along with Shri Himanshu
Suryavanshi, learned counsel for the revisionist, Shri Ashish Raman Mishra, learned
counsel for opposite party no.2, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the material
brought on record.

3. By means of the present revision, the revisionist has assailed the order dated
24.07.2025 passed by Sessions Judge, Barabanki in Sessions Trial No.32263 of 2023,
arising out of FIR No.454 of 2023, under Sections 323, 504, 307 I.P.C., P.S.- Kotwali
Nagar, District- Barabanki.

4. Brief facts of the case are as under.

(i) On 19.04.2023 at about 14:50 hours an FIR was registered as FIR No.0454 of
2023 at P.S.- Kotwali, District - Barabanki, under Sections 323, 504, 354-Kha, 308
I.P.C..

(ii) After completion of investigation, the Investigating Officer (in short 'I.O.')
submitted charge sheet against accused/revisionists/Prachi Verma @ Prachi Singh,
Sushila Devi and Bhupendra Kumar Singh for the offence under Sections 323, 504,
307 I.P.C. and also against co-accused-Yogendra Singh Verma for the offence under
Sections 323, 504, 307, 354-Kha, 452 I.P.C., P.S.- Kotwali, District- Barabanki.

(iii) It is to be noted that names of all the above named accused find place in the FIR.

(iv) It is also to be noted that the charge sheet which ought to have been brought on
record has not been brought on record by the revisionists.

(v) After filing of charge sheet, an Application u/s 482 No.9699 of 2024 was filed. At
this stage, on being asked, learned counsel for the revisionists says that this
application was filed by Sushila Devi and Prachi Verma alias Prachi Singh. This Court
taking note of the facts as indicated passed an order on 13.11.2024 and subsequently
passed the order dated 25.11.2024 in which order dated 13.11.2024 has been referred.
The order dated 25.11.2024 is extracted hereinunder.

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

"1. On 13.11.2024 following order was passed:-

"1. Heard.

2. The instant application has been filed by the applicants with prayer to quash the
entire proceedings of Case No. 32263 of 2023 (State Versus Prachi Verma and
others) arising out of Case Crime No. 454 of 2023 under Sections 323, 504, 307
I.P.C., Police Station - Kotwali Nagar, District - Barabanki pending in the court of
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No. 18, Barabanki as well as impugned
summoning order dated 18.12.2023 and charge-sheet no. 697 of 2023 dated
20.08.2023 under Sections 323, 504, 307 I.P.C. against the applicants filed by the
Investigation Officer.

3. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that the applicants and respondent
no.2 are neighbours and some quarrel was taken place between them. Thereafter, at
the behest of some political leaders, the F.I.R. of the case was lodged by the
complainant of the present case against the accused persons. The medico legal
examination of the injured persons was conducted, in which, simple injury was found
on the body of the alleged injured persons.

It is further submitted that name of one Ram Vilas Verma was entered in emergency
register of Barabanki District Hospital of date 19.04.2023 at 3:15 P.M. at serial No. 12
bearing I.D. No. 21167. As complaint of pain was reported by Ram Vilas Verma as
well as his B.P. was found 110/70 mmhg, he was referred to K.G.M.U. for
examination.

Learned counsel for the applicants draws attention of the Court on the discharge slip
of Ram Vilas Verma, in which, his I.D. No. is shown as 21168, however, in the
emergency register of date 19.04.2023, again I.D. No. 21168 is mentioned at Serial
No. 16 in the name of Ram Vilas Tripathi who was brought to emergency at 4:00 P.M.
in unconscious condition and was referred to R.M.L./K.G.M.U., Lucknow.

It is next submitted that complainant of the present case is also a political leader who
used influence and obtained some interpolation in the documents.

4. List this case on 25.11.2024 at 11:30 A.M.

5. Chief Medical Officer as well as Chief Medical Superintendent, Barabanki District
Hospital shall ensure production of relevant emergency register of date 19.04.2023
with entries from 2:00 P.M. to 8:00 P.M. and shall also ensure production of relevant
record related to discharge of Ram Vilas Verma whose name is mentioned at Serial
No. 12 bearing I.D. No. 21167 in the emergency register of date 19.04.2023.

6. Till the next date of listing, no coercive steps be taken against the applicants.

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

7. On the next date, the parties present today shall again appear in person before this
Court."

2. In pursuance of earlier order, Dr Sanjeev Kumar, the then Emergency Medical Officer, District
Hospital Barabanki and Sri Ram Pratap Singh, Pharmacist, who is maintaining the record in the
office of Chief Medical Officer, Barabanki are present along with relevant record.

3. A specific question was asked from Sri Ram Pratap Singh that as to why he came from the
Hospital, then he replied that no ministerial staff was available and at present he is maintaining the
record in the office of Chief Medical Officer, Barabanki, therefore, he came to the Court.

4. Counter affidavit filed by Sri Arun Sinha, learned counsel for complainant is taken on record.

5. Ten days' time is granted to learned counsel for applicants to file rejoinder affidavit.

6. List immediately thereafter.

7. The Chief Medical Officer, Barabanki shall also file counter affidavit explaining that how many
Pharmacist are working in his office.

8. Original record produced before this Court is returned to the officer concerned.

9. The Officer present today need not appear again unless called for.

10. Interim order granted earlier shall continue to operate till the next date of listing."

(vi) Before proceeding further, it is to be mentioned at this stage that based upon the pendency of
the Application u/s 482 No.9699 of 2024 and the order passed therein, it has been argued that the
injury reports are manipulated and ought not to have relied upon while dealing with the application
seeking discharge.

(vii) In response, this Court put a query to the learned counsel for the revisionists that as to whether
this Court in the Application u/s 482 No.9699 of 2024 has passed any order based upon which the
trial court was under obligation to ignore the injury reports on record

(viii) Learned counsel for the revisionist, in response to above, fairly submitted that no such order
has been passed by this Court in Application u/s 482 No.9699 of 2024 and the said application is
still pending.

(ix) The Magistrate taking note of the fact that the case is triable by court of Sessions, committed the
matter to the Sessions Court and before the Sessions Court the case was registered as Session Case
No.1915 of 2024 (State Vs. Prachi Verma & others).

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

(x) Before the Sessions Court, the applicants, who according to the learned counsel for the
revisionists are on bail, preferred an application seeking discharge in terms of Section 250 B.N.S.S.
(akin to Section 227 Cr.P.C.). This application is on record as Annexure No.1. The prayer of this
application is relevant and being so the same is extracted hereinunder.

"10. (cid:128)(cid:129) (cid:130)(cid:131) (cid:132)(cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:134)(cid:133)(cid:136)(cid:137)(cid:138)(cid:139) (cid:130)(cid:140) (cid:141)(cid:131)(cid:134)(cid:142)(cid:143)(cid:133)(cid:144) (cid:144)(cid:135)(cid:134)(cid:135) 307 (cid:145)(cid:135)(cid:146)(cid:143)(cid:146)(cid:141)(cid:131)(cid:146) (cid:130)(cid:135) (cid:130)(cid:147)(cid:148) (cid:149)(cid:134)(cid:147)(cid:132) (cid:138)(cid:150)(cid:131)(cid:151) (cid:152)(cid:129)(cid:137)(cid:153)
(cid:129)(cid:147)(cid:151)(cid:135) (cid:129)(cid:154)(cid:155) (cid:132)(cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:134)(cid:133)(cid:136)(cid:137)(cid:138)(cid:139) (cid:130)(cid:147) (cid:144)(cid:135)(cid:134)(cid:135) 307 (cid:145)(cid:135)(cid:146)(cid:143)(cid:146)(cid:141)(cid:131)(cid:146) (cid:130)(cid:140) (cid:149)(cid:134)(cid:147)(cid:132) (cid:156)(cid:140) (cid:157)(cid:131)(cid:156)(cid:133)(cid:158)(cid:135)(cid:134)(cid:133)(cid:159) (cid:130)(cid:131)(cid:128)(cid:140)
(cid:159)(cid:135)(cid:152)(cid:140) (cid:130)(cid:137) (cid:149)(cid:141)(cid:160)(cid:133)(cid:128)(cid:130)(cid:151)(cid:135) (cid:129)(cid:154)(cid:155)"

(xi) From the aforesaid prayer sought, it is apparent that the discharge application was moved only
with regard to the offence under Section 307 I.P.C. and not for the other offences.

(xii) A perusal of the para 5 of the affidavit of this application as also the submissions of learned
counsel for the revisionists indicates that the application seeking discharge for the offence under
Section 307 I.P.C. was moved on the basis of the fact(s)/grounds which are as under.

(a) Injuries sustained by the injured persons, who were examined by Dr. Sanjay Kumar, were simple
in nature.

(b) There was overwriting/manipulation in the Medical Register of Emergency Room of District
Hospital, Barabanki.

(c) As per Medical Register of Emergency Room of District Hospital, Barabanki, entry at Serial
No.12 regarding I.D. No.21167, 3:15 P.M. indicates that Ram Vilas Verma was discharged after
taking note of the fact that he sustained simple injuries and the name of this very injured finds place
at serial no.16, I.D. No.21168 4:00 P.M. which indicates that he was unconscious and referred to
RML/KGMU, Lucknow.

(d) The injury report does not support the contents of the FIR as it was lodged promptly at 14:50
hours and the incident was of 12 noon, and the injury report indicates that the injury could be
sustained before 12 hours. The prayer is to interfere in the matter.

5. Shri Ashish Raman Mishra, learned counsel for opposite party no.2 and learned A.G.A. opposed
the present application. It is stated that to attract the offence under Section 307 I.P.C. even injury is
not required what to say about the nature of injury and only intention has to be gathered. To
ascertain the intention, the evidence is required and the trial court could conclude in the manner
after taking note of the evidence adduced by the parties during trial before the trial court which
includes the evidence of the accused applicants/revisionists herein and accordingly, no interference
is required in the matter.

6. It is further submitted that the manipulation if any in Medical Register is also required to be
considered during trial and at this stage, i.e. the stage of seeking discharge, no observation or
finding on this aspect of the case is required to be given by the trial court.

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

7. It is further submitted that the injured persons, namely, Ram Vilas Verma and Smt. Sushila
Verma and also the victim/Priya Verma supported the story of the prosecution and it is settled
proposition that the statement/testimony of the injured witness/victim has greater evidential value
and the same could be ignored in exceptional circumstances by the trial court after assessing the
evidence of parties at the stage of pronouncement of judgment. In this regard reference is to the
judgment passed in the case of State of M.P. vs. Mansingh, (2003) 10 SCC 414; Jarnail Singh v. State
of Punjab, (2009) 9 SCC 719; Balraje @ Trimbak v. State of Maharashtra, (2010) 6 SCC 673; Abdul
Sayeed vs. State of M.P., (2010) 10 SCC 259; State of U.P. vs. Naresh, (2011) 4 SCC 324; Laxman
Singh vs. State of Bihar (Now Jharkhand) (2021) 9 SCC 191; Balu Sudam Khalde and another vs.
State of Maharashtra, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 355.

8. It is also submitted that from a perusal of statement of Dr. Alankar Kumar Gupta, Gastro
Surgeon, Chandan Hospital, Lucknow (Annexure No.6), would indicate that injured/Ram Vilas
Verma sustained serious/grievous injury as this injured was operated for treating the damage
caused to his small intestine by the accused and this aspect of the case is also evident from Annexure
No.8 to the instant application, which is copy of case summary of injured/Ram Vilas Verma.

9. It is also stated that FIR is not encyclopedia and only placing reliance on the same conclusion
should not be drawn on issue related to offence under Section 307 I.P.C.

10. In rebuttal, Shri Chakravarty, learned counsel for the revisionists stated as under.

(i) The injuries/nature of injuries ought to have been considered while dealing with the application
seeking discharge after taking note of various provisions of Indian Penal Code, i.e. Section 319 to
Section 338 and other sections which include Section(s) 307 and 308 I.P.C.

(ii) It is also stated that without ultrasound of abdomen, how the Doctor could conclude that small
intestine has been damaged and no findings with regard to the grievous injuries have been recorded
by the concerned Doctor.

(iii) The trial court erred in law and fact both in not considering the statement(s) of the injured
witnesses in its true spirit.

11. Considered the aforesaid and perused the record.

12. The present case relates to Section 307 I.P.C. and for coming to the conclusion as to whether the
trial court has rightly rejected the application seeking discharge only with regard to offence under
Section 307 I.P.C. it would be appropriate to refer Section 307 IPC as also the some
pronouncements on the issue.

13. Section 307 I.P.C. reads as under:

'307. Attempt to murder.--Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge,
and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to
any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or
to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned.

Attempts by life convicts.--When any person offending under this section is under
sentence of imprisonment for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.

Illustrations

(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death
ensued, A would be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section.

(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it in a
desert place. A has committed the offence defined by this section, though the death of
the child does not ensue.

(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the
offence. A fires the gun at Z. He has committed the offence defined in this section,
and, if by such firing he wounds Z, he is liable to the punishment provided by the
latter part of the first paragraph of this section.

(d) A, intending to murder Z, by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with
food which remains in A's keeping; A has not yet committed the offence in this
section. A places the food on Z's table or delivers it to Z's servants to place it on Z's
table. A has committed the offence defined in this section.'

14. In State of Maharashtra v. Balram Bama Patil [State of Maharashtra v. Balram Bama Patil,
(1983) 2 SCC 28 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 320], Hon'ble Apex Court held that it is not necessary that a bodily
injury sufficient under normal circumstances to cause death should have been inflicted :

"9. ... To justify a conviction under this section it is not essential that bodily injury
capable of causing death should have been inflicted. Although the nature of injury
actually caused may often give considerable assistance in coming to a finding as to
the intention of the accused, such intention may also be deduced from other
circumstances, and may even, in some cases, be ascertained without any reference at
all to actual wounds. The section makes a distinction between an act of the accused
and its result, if any. Such an act may not be attended by any result so far as the
person assaulted is concerned, but still there may be cases in which the culprit would
be liable under this section. It is not necessary that the injury actually caused to the
victim of the assault should be sufficient under ordinary circumstances to cause the
death of the person assaulted. What the Court has to see is whether the act,
irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or knowledge and under
circumstances mentioned in this section. An attempt in order to be criminal need not

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

be the penultimate act. It is sufficient in law, if there is present an intent coupled with
some overt act in execution thereof.

(emphasis supplied)"

15. In State of M.P. v. Saleem [State of M.P. v. Saleem, (2005) 5 SCC 554 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1329],
Hon'ble Apex Court held thus :

"13. It is sufficient to justify a conviction under Section 307 if there is present an
intent coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. It is not essential that bodily
injury capable of causing death should have been inflicted. The section makes a
distinction between the act of the accused and its result, if any. The court has to see
whether the act, irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or knowledge
and under circumstances mentioned in the section. Therefore, an accused charged
under Section 307 IPC cannot be acquitted merely because the injuries inflicted on
the victim were in the nature of a simple hurt.

(emphasis supplied)"

16. In Jage Ram v. State of Haryana [Jage Ram v. State of Haryana, (2015) 11 SCC 366 : (2015) 4
SCC (Cri) 425], Hon'ble Apex Court held that to establish the commission of an offence under
Section 307, it is not essential that a fatal injury capable of causing death should have been inflicted
:

"12. For the purpose of conviction under Section 307 IPC, the prosecution has to
establish (i) the intention to commit murder; and (ii) the act done by the accused.
The burden is on the prosecution that the accused had attempted to commit the
murder of the prosecution witness. Whether the accused person intended to commit
murder of another person would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each
case. To justify a conviction under Section 307 IPC, it is not essential that fatal injury
capable of causing death should have been caused. Although the nature of injury
actually caused may be of assistance in coming to a finding as to the intention of the
accused, such intention may also be adduced from other circumstances. The
intention of the accused is to be gathered from the circumstances like the nature of
the weapon used, words used by the accused at the time of the incident, motive of the
accused, parts of the body where the injury was caused and the nature of injury and
severity of the blows given, etc."

17. In State of Maharashtra v. Kashirao, (2003) 10 SCC 434, the Hon'ble Apex Court identified the
essential ingredients for the applicability of the section. The relevant extract is as below:

"The essential ingredients required to be proved in the case of an offence under
Section 307 are:

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

(i) that the death of a human being was attempted;

(ii) that such death was attempted to be caused by, or in consequence of the act of the
accused; and

(iii) that such act was done with the intention of causing death; or that it was done
with the intention of causing such bodily injury as : (a) the accused knew to be likely
to cause death; or (b) was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death,
or that the accused attempted to cause death by doing an act known to him to be so
imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause (a) death, or (b) such
bodily injury as is likely to cause death, the accused having no excuse for incurring
the risk of causing such death or injury."

18. Hon'ble Apex Court in Om Prakash v. State of Punjab, 1961 SCC OnLine SC 72, as far back as
1961, observed the constituents of the Section, having referred to various judgments of the Privy
Council, as under:

"a person commits an offence under Section 307 when he has an intention to commit
murder and, in pursuance of that intention, does an act towards its commission
irrespective of the fact whether that act is the penultimate act or not. It is to be clearly
understood, however, that the intention to commit the offence of murder means that
the person concerned has the intention to do certain act with the necessary intention
or knowledge mentioned in Section 300. The intention to commit an offence is
different from the intention or knowledge requisite for constituting the act as that
offence. The expression "whoever attempts to commit an offence" in Section 511, can
only mean "whoever : intends to do a certain act with the intent or knowledge
necessary for the commission of that offence". The same is meant by the expression
"whoever does an act with such intention or knowledge and under such
circumstances that if he, by that act, caused death, he would be guilty of murder" in
Section 307. This simply means that the act must be done with the intent or
knowledge requisite for the commission of the offence of murder. The expression "by
that act" does not mean that the immediate effect of the act committed must be
death. Such a result must be the result of that act whether immediately or after a
lapse of time."

(Emphasis supplied)

19. In Hari Mohan Mandal v. State of Jharkhand, (2004) 12 SCC 220, the Hon'ble Apex Court holds
that the nature or extent of injury suffered, are irrelevant factors for the conviction under this
section, so long as the injury is inflicted with animus. It has been held:

"10. ...To justify a conviction under this section, it is not essential that bodily injury
capable of causing death should have been inflicted. Although the nature of injury
actually caused may often give considerable assistance in coming to a finding as to

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

the intention of the accused, such intention may also be deduced from other
circumstances, and may even, in some cases, be ascertained without any reference at
all to actual wounds. ...What the court has to see is whether the act, irrespective of its
result, was done with the intention or knowledge and under circumstances
mentioned in the section. An attempt in order to be criminal need not be the
penultimate act. It is sufficient in law, if there is present an intent coupled with some
overt act in execution thereof.

11. It is sufficient to justify a conviction under Section 307 if there is present an intent
coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. It is not essential that bodily injury
capable of causing death should have been inflicted. If the injury inflicted has been
with the avowed object or intention to cause death, the ritual nature, extent or
character of the injury or whether such injury is sufficient to actually causing death
are really factors which are wholly irrelevant for adjudging the culpability under
Section 307 IPC. The section makes a distinction between the act of the accused and
its result, if any. The court has to see whether the act, irrespective of its result, was
done with the intention or knowledge and under circumstances mentioned in the
section. Therefore, it is not correct to acquit an accused of the charge under Section
307 IPC merely because the injuries inflicted on the victim were in the nature of a
simple hurt."

20. In the case of State of M.P. vs. Kashiram & Ors. (2009 4 SCC 26), the scope of intention for
attracting conviction under Section 307 IPC was elaborated and it was held as under:-

"13. It is sufficient to justify a conviction under Section 307 if there is present an
intent coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. It is not essential that bodily
injury capable of causing death should have been inflicted. The section makes a
distinction between the act of the accused and its result, if any. The court has to see
whether the act, irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or knowledge
and under circumstances mentioned in the section. Therefore, an accused charged
under Section 307 IPC cannot be acquitted merely because the injuries inflicted on
the victim were in the nature of a simple hurt.

14. This position was highlighted in State of Maharashtra v. Balram Bama Patil,
(1983) 2 SCC 28, Girija Shanker v. State of U.P. (2004) 3 SCC 793 and R. Prakash v.
State of Karnataka (2004) 9 SCC 27.

* * *

16. Whether there was intention to kill or knowledge that death will be caused is a
question of fact and would depend on the facts of a given case. The circumstances
that the injury inflicted by the accused was simple or minor will not by itself rule out
application of Section 307 IPC. The determinative question is the intention or
knowledge, as the case may be, and not the nature of the injury."

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

21. In Surinder Singh v. State (UT of Chandigarh), (2021) 20 SCC 24 : 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1135, the
Hon'ble Apex Court holds as under:

"A. Whether the guilt of the appellant under Section 307 IPC has been proved beyond
reasonable doubt?

19. Before we advert to the factual matrix or gauge the trustworthiness of the
witnesses, it will be beneficial to brace ourselves of the case law qua the essential
conditions, requisite for bringing home a conviction under Section 307 IPC. In State
of M.P. v. Saleem [State of M.P. v. Saleem, (2005) 5 SCC 554 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1329] ,
this Court, while re-appreciating the true import of Section 307 IPC held as follows :
(SCC pp. 559-60, paras 12-13) "12. To justify a conviction under this section, it is not
essential that bodily injury capable of causing death should have been inflicted.
Although the nature of injury actually caused may often give considerable assistance
in coming to a finding as to the intention of the accused, such intention may also be
deduced from other circumstances, and may even, in some cases, be ascertained
without any reference at all to actual wounds. The section makes a distinction
between an act of the accused and its result, if any. Such an act may not be attended
by any result so far as the person assaulted is concerned, but still there may be cases
in which the culprit would be liable under this section. It is not necessary that the
injury actually caused to the victim of the assault should be sufficient under ordinary
circumstances to cause the death of the person assaulted. What the court has to see is
whether the act, irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or knowledge
and under circumstances mentioned in the section. An attempt in order to be
criminal need not be the penultimate act. It is sufficient in law, if there is present an
intent coupled with some overt act in execution thereof.

13. It is sufficient to justify a conviction under Section 307 if there is present an intent
coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. It is not essential that bodily injury
capable of causing death should have been inflicted. The section makes a distinction
between the act of the accused and its result, if any. The court has to see whether the
act, irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or knowledge and under
circumstances mentioned in the section. Therefore, an accused charged under
Section 307 IPC cannot be acquitted merely because the injuries inflicted on the
victim were in the nature of a simple hurt."

(emphasis supplied)

20. These very ingredients have been accentuated in some of the later decisions, including in State
of M.P. v. Kashiram [State of M.P. v. Kashiram, (2009) 4 SCC 26 : (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 40] , Jage
Ram v. State of Haryana [Jage Ram v. State of Haryana, (2015) 11 SCC 366 : (2015) 4 SCC (Cri) 425]
and State of M.P. v. Kanha [State of M.P. v. Kanha, (2019) 3 SCC 605 : (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 247] .

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

21. It is by now a lucid dictum that for the purpose of constituting an offence under Section 307 IPC,
there are two ingredients that a court must consider, first, whether there was any intention or
knowledge on the part of the accused to cause death of the victim, and, second, such intent or
knowledge was followed by some overt actus rea in execution thereof, irrespective of the
consequential result as to whether or not any injury is inflicted upon the victim. The courts may
deduce such intent from the conduct of the accused and surrounding circumstances of the offence,
including the nature of weapon used or the nature of injury, if any. The manner in which occurrence
took place may enlighten more than the prudential escape of a victim. It is thus not necessary that a
victim shall have to suffer an injury dangerous to his life, for attracting Section 307 IPC.

22. It would also be fruitful at this stage, to appraise whether the requirement of "motive" is
indispensable for proving the charge of attempt to murder under Section 307 IPC.

23. It is significant to note that "motive" is distinct from "object and means" which innervates or
provokes an action. Unlike "intention", "motive" is not the yardstick of a crime. A lawful act with an
ill motive would not constitute an offence but it may not be true when an unlawful act is committed
with best of the motive. Unearthing "motive" is akin to an exercise of manual brain-mapping. At
times, it becomes Herculean task to ascertain the traces of a "motive".

24. This Court has time and again ruled : (Bipin Kumar Mondal case [Bipin Kumar Mondal v. State
of W.B., (2010) 12 SCC 91 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 150] , SCC p. 97, para 23) "23. ... that in case the
prosecution is not able to discover an impelling motive, that could not reflect upon the credibility of
a witness proved to be a reliable eyewitness. Evidence as to motive would, no doubt, go a long way in
cases wholly dependent on circumstantial evidence. Such evidence would form one of the links in
the chain of circumstantial evidence in such a case. But that would not be so in cases where there are
eyewitnesses of credibility, though even in such cases if a motive is properly proved, such proof
would strengthen the prosecution case and fortify the court in its ultimate conclusion. But that does
not mean that if motive is not established, the evidence of an eyewitness is rendered untrustworthy."

(emphasis supplied) [See : Shivaji Genu Mohite v. State of Maharashtra [Shivaji Genu Mohite v.
State of Maharashtra, (1973) 3 SCC 219 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 214] and Bipin Kumar Mondal v. State of
W.B. [Bipin Kumar Mondal v. State of W.B., (2010) 12 SCC 91 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 150] ]

25. We are thus of the considered opinion that whilst motive is infallibly a crucial factor, and is a
substantial aid for evincing the commission of an offence but the absence thereof is, however, not
such a quintessential component which can be construed as fatal to the case of the prosecution,
especially when all other factors point towards the guilt of the accused and testaments of
eyewitnesses to the occurrence of a malfeasance are on record."

22. Paras 8 and 9 of the judgment in the case Sivamani and another Vs. State represented by
Inspector of Police, Vellore Taluk Police Station, Vellore District, reported in [2023] 14 S.C.R. 849
referred by Shri Chakravarty, are as under.

"ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

8. Section 307, IPC reads as under:

'307. Attempt to murder.--Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge,
and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty
of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to
any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to imprisonment for life, or
to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned.

Attempts by life convicts.--When any person offending under this section is under
sentence of imprisonment for life, he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.

Illustrations

(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death
ensued, A would be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section.

(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it in a
desert place. A has committed the offence defined by this section, though the death of
the child does not ensue.

(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the
offence. A fires the gun at Z. He has committed the offence defined in this section,
and, if by such firing he wounds Z, he is liable to the punishment provided by the
latter part of the first paragraph of this section.

(d) A, intending to murder Z, by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with
food which remains in A's keeping; A has not yet committed the offence in this
section. A places the food on Z's table or delivers it to Z's servants to place it on Z's
table. A has committed the offence defined in this section.'

9. In State of Madhya Pradesh v. Saleem, (2005) 5 SCC 554, the Court held that to
sustain a conviction under Section 307, IPC, it was not necessary that a bodily injury
capable of resulting in death should have been inflicted. As such, non-conviction
under Section 307, IPC on the premise only that simple injury was inflicted does not
follow as a matter of course. In the same judgment, it was pointed out that '...The
court has to see whether the act, irrespective of its result, was done with the intention
or knowledge and under circumstances mentioned in the section.' The position that
b e c a u s e a f a t a l i n j u r y w a s n o t s u s t a i n e d a l o n e d o e s n o t d i s l o d g e
Section 307, IPC conviction has been reiterated in Jage Ram v. State of
Haryana, (2015) 11 SCC 366 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Kanha, (2019) 3 SCC
605. Yet, in Jage Ram (supra) and Kanha (supra), it was observed that while grievous
or life-threatening injury was not necessary to maintain a conviction under
Section 307, IPC, 'The intention of the accused can be ascertained from the actual

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

injury, if any, as well as from surrounding circumstances. Among other things, the
nature of the weapon used and the severity of the blows inflicted can be considered to
infer intent."

23. Relevant paras of the judgment passed in the case of Shoyeb Raja Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh
and others, reported in 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2624 , referred by Shri Chakravarty are as under.

" 5 . T h e A d d i t i o n a l S e s s i o n s J u d g e , S e o n i , f r a m e d c h a r g e s u n d e r
Sections 294, 332/34 and 307/34 IPC. Such framing of charge by order dated
17th September, 2019 was challenged before the High Court in Criminal Revision No.
4805 of 2019, whereby vide order dated 21st January, 2020 the same was set aside
on the ground that the documents made part of the record were not supplied to the
accused. The matter was remanded for framing of charge afresh.

6. It is in this backdrop, that the order impugned before the High Court came to be
passed. Regarding Section 307, the order records:--

"In this way in the said medical report, based on the circumstances arising as a result
of future aspects, keeping in view, the possibilities, it has been mentioned that if
pressure was applied on the scratch marks present in the mouth, nose and throat it
could have caused obstruction of the respiratory tract. The said possibility is
dependent on that if the accused had committed further acts of the above type, there
was a possibility that the windpipe could have been blocked. It has not been said in
the report that the injury caused by the accused or the act done by them was likely to
result in the death of the complainant. In the above situation, prima facie there is no
basis for offence under Section 307 IPC against the accused."

In respect of the other allegations and alleged crimes, it was observed:--

"As far as the allegations of other crimes against the accused are concerned, the First
Information Report has been filed by the complainant to the effect that he was the
Chairman of the Waqf Committee in District Seoni, then during his official duty he
went to the Mosque to settle the dispute. There, the accused abused and beat him and
pressed his mouth, nose and neck. In the above situation, prima facie there are
grounds for crime under Sections 294 and 334 read with 34 of the Penal Code,
1860 against all the accused......"

x x x x x x

11. Let us at this stage, consider the law as laid down by this Court in respect of this section, as also
that of Section 34 IPC, given that there are a total of eight respondents (accused) before the court.

11.1 In State of Maharashtra v. Kashirao, the Court identified the essential ingredients for the
applicability of the section. The relevant extract is as below:

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

"The essential ingredients required to be proved in the case of an offence under
Section 307 are:

(i) that the death of a human being was attempted;

(ii) that such death was attempted to be caused by, or in consequence of the act of the
accused; and

(iii) that such act was done with the intention of causing death; or that it was done
with the intention of causing such bodily injury as : (a) the accused knew to be likely
to cause death; or (b) was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death,
or that the accused attempted to cause death by doing an act known to him to be so
imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause (a) death, or (b) such
bodily injury as is likely to cause death, the accused having no excuse for incurring
the risk of causing such death or injury."

11.2 This Court in Om Prakash v. State of Punjab, as far back as 1961, observed the constituents of
the Section, having referred to various judgments of the Privy Council, as under:

"a person commits an offence under Section 307 when he has an intention to commit
murder and, in pursuance of that intention, does an act towards its commission
irrespective of the fact whether that act is the penultimate act or not. It is to be clearly
understood, however, that the intention to commit the offence of murder means that
the person concerned has the intention to do certain act with the necessary intention
or knowledge mentioned in Section 300. The intention to commit an offence is
different from the intention or knowledge requisite for constituting the act as that
offence. The expression "whoever attempts to commit an offence" in Section 511, can
only mean "whoever : intends to do a certain act with the intent or knowledge
necessary for the commission of that offence". The same is meant by the expression
"whoever does an act with such intention or knowledge and under such
circumstances that if he, by that act, caused death, he would be guilty of murder" in
Section 307. This simply means that the act must be done with the intent or
knowledge requisite for the commission of the offence of murder. The expression "by
that act" does not mean that the immediate effect of the act committed must be
death. Such a result must be the result of that act whether immediately or after a
lapse of time."

(Emphasis supplied) 11.3 Hari Mohan Mandal v. State of Jharkhand holds that the nature or extent
of injury suffered, are irrelevant factors for the conviction under this section, so long as the injury is
inflicted with animus. It has been held:

"10. ...To justify a conviction under this section, it is not essential that bodily injury
capable of causing death should have been inflicted. Although the nature of injury
actually caused may often give considerable assistance in coming to a finding as to

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

the intention of the accused, such intention may also be deduced from other
circumstances, and may even, in some cases, be ascertained without any reference at
all to actual wounds. ...What the court has to see is whether the act, irrespective of its
result, was done with the intention or knowledge and under circumstances
mentioned in the section. An attempt in order to be criminal need not be the
penultimate act. It is sufficient in law, if there is present an intent coupled with some
overt act in execution thereof.

11. It is sufficient to justify a conviction under Section 307 if there is present an intent
coupled with some overt act in execution thereof. It is not essential that bodily injury
capable of causing death should have been inflicted. If the injury inflicted has been
with the avowed object or intention to cause death, the ritual nature, extent or
character of the injury or whether such injury is sufficient to actually causing death
are really factors which are wholly irrelevant for adjudging the culpability under
Section 307 IPC. The section makes a distinction between the act of the accused and
its result, if any. The court has to see whether the act, irrespective of its result, was
done with the intention or knowledge and under circumstances mentioned in the
section. Therefore, it is not correct to acquit an accused of the charge under
Section 307 IPC merely because the injuries inflicted on the victim were in the nature
of a simple hurt."

(Emphasis supplied) 11.4 The principle governing the application of Section 34 has been captured
thus in Chhota Ahirwar v. State of M.P. "24. Section 34 is only attracted when a specific criminal act
is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, in which case all the
offenders are liable for that criminal act in the same manner as the principal offender as if the act
were done by all the offenders. This section does not whittle down the liability of the principal
offender committing the principal act but additionally makes all other offenders liable. The essence
of liability under Section 34 is simultaneous consensus of the minds of persons participating in the
criminal act to bring about a particular result, which consensus can even be developed at the spot as
held in Lallan Rai v. State of Bihar [Lallan Rai v. State of Bihar, (2003) 1 SCC 268 : 2003 SCC (Cri)
301]. There must be a common intention to commit the particular offence. To constitute common
intention, it is absolutely necessary that the intention of each one of the accused should be known to
the rest of the accused."

11.5 Sanjiv Khanna J., writing for the Court in Krishnamurthy v. State of Karnataka, encapsulated,
succinctly its field of operation as under:

"26. Section 34 IPC makes a co-perpetrator, who had participated in the offence,
equally liable on the principle of joint liability. For Section 34 to apply there should
be common intention between the co-perpetrators, which means that there should be
community of purpose and common design or prearranged plan. However, this does
not mean that co-perpetrators should have engaged in any discussion, agreement or
valuation. For Section 34 to apply, it is not necessary that the plan should be
prearranged or hatched for a considerable time before the criminal act is

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

performed. Common intention can be formed just a minute before the actual act
happens. Common intention is necessarily a psychological fact as it requires prior
meeting of minds. In such cases, direct evidence normally will not be available and in
most cases, whether or not there exists a common intention has to be determined by
drawing inference from the facts proved. This requires an inquiry into the
antecedents, conduct of the co-participants or perpetrators at the time and after the
occurrence. The manner in which the accused arrived, mounted the attack, nature
a n d t y p e o f i n j u r i e s i n f l i c t e d , t h e w e a p o n u s e d , c o n d u c t o r a c t s o f t h e
co-assailants/perpetrators, object and purpose behind the occurrence or the attack,
etc. are all relevant facts from which inference has to be drawn to arrive at a
conclusion whether or not the ingredients of Section 34IPC are satisfied. We must
remember that Section 34IPC comes into operation against the co-perpetrators
b e c a u s e t h e y h a v e n o t c o m m i t t e d t h e p r i n c i p a l o r m a i n a c t , w h i c h i s
undertaken/performed or is attributed to the main culprit or perpetrator..."

(Emphasis supplied) x x x x

13. It is well recognized that intention may not always be proved by hard evidence and instead may
be required to be inferred from the facts and circumstances of the case. If the doctor who conducted
the examination posits the possibility of throttling, then under what circumstances, without rigorous
cross-examination, could it be concluded that the injuries sustained were simple? That apart, even if
the injuries were taken as simple, the extent of the injuries, as observed supra in Hari Mohan
Mondal, are not relevant, if the intent is present. We are not in agreement with the learned Courts
below that intent was absent, as the Doctor's report itself records throttling to be reasonably
suspected.

14. The third criterion as in Kashirao (supra) could also arguably be met. Whether or not it is met, is
a matter of determination at trial. The question of intention to kill or the knowledge of death in
terms of Section 307, IPC is a question of fact and not one of law.

15. This Court's scope of interference under Article 136 of the Constitution of India is well
established. Reference made be made to Mathura Prashad v. State of M.P. It was held as below:

"9. This Court in Balak Ram v. State of U.P. [(1975) 3 SCC 219, 227 : 1974 SCC (Cri)
8 3 7 ] h e l d t h a t t h e p o w e r s o f t h e S u p r e m e C o u r t u n d e r A r t i c l e 1 3 6 o f
the Constitution are wide but in criminal appeals, this Court does not interfere with
the concurrent findings of fact save in exceptional circumstances. The scope of
interference by this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India in a case of
concurrent findings of fact arose in Arunachalam v. P.S.R. Sadhananthan [(1979) 2
SCC 297 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 454] wherein this Court has held that:

"Article 136 of the Constitution of India invests the Supreme Court with a plentitude
of plenary appellate power over all Courts and Tribunals in India. The power is
plenary in the sense that there are no words under Article 136 itself qualifying that

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

power. But, the very nature of the power has led the Court to set limits to itself within
which to exercise such power..."

In recognition of these self-imposed, long-standing, and justified limitations, interference is to be
made, more so, when a Court, in arriving at its findings has acted perversely or otherwise
improperly. [See : State of Madras v. A. Vaidyanatha Iyer] This has been the consistently adopted
position till date. [See : Shahaja alias Shahajan Ismail Mohd. Shaikh v. State of Maharashtra]

16. In view of the above discussion, given that the minor nature of injuries is not sufficient reason to
not frame a charge under Section 307 IPC, as per the law laid down by this Court, the judgment
impugned, passed in Criminal Revision No. 3125 of 2021 dated 23rd November, 2023, is set aside.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The concerned Trial Court is directed to have the Respondents
stand trial for all the offences for which charges have been framed, as also Section 307. The trial
shall proceed on its own merits, as per law, uninfluenced by the observations hereinabove which
were for the limited purpose of testing the propriety of the impugned order. The same shall be
expedited.

24. The above judgments of Hon'ble Apex Court leads to the conclusion that proof of grievous or
life-threatening hurt is not a sine qua non for the offence under Section 307 of the Penal Code. The
intention of the accused can be ascertained from the actual injury, if any, as well as from
surrounding circumstances. Among other things, the nature of the weapon used and the severity of
the blows inflicted can be considered to infer intent.

25. The Apex Court has held that for conviction under Section 307 IPC the intention to cause death
is also required to be proved along with the injuries inflicted.

26. For the purpose of conviction under Section 307 IPC, prosecution has to establish (i) the
intention to commit murder and (ii) the act done by the accused. The burden is on the prosecution
that accused had attempted to commit the murder of the prosecution witness. Whether the accused
person intended to commit murder of another person would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. To justify a conviction under Section 307 IPC, it is not essential that
fatal injury capable of causing death should have been caused. Although the nature of injury actually
caused may be of assistance in coming to a finding as to the intention of the accused, such intention
may also be adduced from other circumstances. The intention of the accused is to be gathered from
the circumstances like the nature of the weapon used, words used by the accused at the time of the
incident, motive of the accused, parts of the body where the injury was caused and the nature of
injury and severity of the blows given etc.

27. For the conviction under Section 307 IPC more importance has been given to mens rea or the
intention than the actus reus or the actual act itself. The attempt should arise out of a specific
intention or desire to murder the victim. The nature of the weapon used, the manner in which it is
used, motive for the crime, severity of the blow, the part of the body where the injury is inflicted is
all taken into consideration to determine the intention.

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

28. From the aforesaid above referred judgments, it is apparent that the injury is not required. It is
the intention which is required and intention would be gathered by the trial court only after
adducing the evidence by the counsel for the parties and not at the stage of discharge. With regard to
the principles settled by the Hon'ble Apex Court while dealing with the discharge application, this
Court also finds appropriate to take note of the principles settled in the various pronouncements.

29. The Hon'ble Apex in the case of Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander, (2012) 9 SCC 460 has
observed as under:-

17. Framing of a charge is an exercise of jurisdiction by the trial court in terms of
Section 228 of the Code, unless the accused is discharged under Section 227 of the
Code. Under both these provisions, the court is required to consider the "record of
the case" and documents submitted therewith and, after hearing the parties, may
either discharge the accused or where it appears to the court and in its opinion there
is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, it shall frame the
charge. Once the facts and ingredients of the section exists, then the court would be
right in presuming that there is ground to proceed against the accused and frame the
charge accordingly. This presumption is not a presumption of law as such. The
satisfaction of the court in relation to the existence of constituents of an offence and
the facts leading to that offence is a sine qua non for exercise of such jurisdiction. It
may even be weaker than a prima facie case. There is a fine distinction between the
language of Sections 227 and 228 of the Code. Section 227 is the expression of a
definite opinion and judgment of the Court while Section 228 is tentative. Thus, to
say that at the stage of framing of charge, the Court should form an opinion that the
accused is certainly guilty of committing an offence, is an approach which is
impermissible in terms of Section 228 of the Code.

18. It may also be noticed that the revisional jurisdiction exercised by the High Court
is in a way final and no inter court remedy is available in such cases. Of course, it may
be subject to jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
Normally, a revisional jurisdiction should be exercised on a question of law.
However, when factual appreciation is involved, then it must find place in the class of
cases resulting in a perverse finding. Basically, the power is required to be exercised
so that justice is done and there is no abuse of power by the court. Merely an
apprehension or suspicion of the same would not be a sufficient ground for
interference in such cases.

19. At the initial stage of framing of a charge, the court is concerned not with proof
but with a strong suspicion that the accused has committed an offence, which, if put
to trial, could prove him guilty. All that the court has to see is that the material on
record and the facts would be compatible with the innocence of the accused or not.
The final test of guilt is not to be applied at that stage. We may refer to the
well-settled law laid down by this Court in State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh [(1977) 4
SCC 39 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 533] : (SCC pp. 41-42, para 4) "4. Under Section 226 of the

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

Code while opening the case for the prosecution the Prosecutor has got to describe
the charge against the accused and state by what evidence he proposes to prove the
guilt of the accused. Thereafter comes at the initial stage the duty of the court to
consider the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith and to hear
the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in that behalf. The Judge has to
pass thereafter an order either under Section 227 or Section 228 of the Code. If 'the
Judge considers that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused,
he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing', as enjoined by
Section 227. If, on the other hand, 'the Judge is of opinion that there is ground for
presuming that the accused has committed an offence which (b) is exclusively triable
by the court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused', as provided in
Section 228. Reading the two provisions together in juxtaposition, as they have got to
be, it would be clear that at the beginning and the initial stage of the trial the truth,
veracity and effect of the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to
be meticulously judged. Nor is any weight to be attached to the probable defence of
the accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that stage of the trial to consider in
any detail and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if proved, would be
incompatible with the innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and
judgment which is to be finally applied before recording a finding regarding the guilt
or otherwise of the accused is not exactly to be applied at the stage of deciding the
matter under Section 227 or Section 228 of the Code. At that stage the court is not to
see whether there is sufficient ground for conviction of the accused or whether the
trial is sure to end in his conviction. Strong suspicion against the accused, if the
matter remains in the region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at
the conclusion of the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which
leads the court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed an offence then it is not open to the court to say that there is no sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused. The presumption of the guilt of the
accused which is to be drawn at the initial stage is not in the sense of the law
governing the trial of criminal cases in France where the accused is presumed to be
guilty unless the contrary is proved. But it is only for the purpose of deciding prima
facie whether the court should proceed with the trial or not. If the evidence which the
Prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of the accused even if fully accepted
before it is challenged in cross-examination or rebutted by the defence evidence, if
any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, then there will be no
sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial. An exhaustive list of the
circumstances to indicate as to what will lead to one conclusion or the other is neither
possible nor advisable. We may just illustrate the difference of the law by one more
example. If the scales of pan as to the guilt or innocence of the accused are something
like even at the conclusion of the trial, then, on the theory of benefit of doubt the case
is to end in his acquittal. But if, on the other hand, it is so at the initial stage of
making an order under Section 227 or Section 228, then in such a situation ordinarily
and generally the order which will have to be made will be one under Section 228 and
not under Section 227."

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

30. Subsequently, the ambit and scope of Section 227 Cr.P.C. as well as parameters regarding
exercise of jurisdiction under Section 227 Cr.P.C. came to be considered by a three Judges Bench of
Supreme Court in Tarun Jit Tejpal Vs. State of Goa and Another, 2019 SCC OnLine SC 1053,
wherein Court concluded as under in paragraphs 8 and 9:-

8. Now, so far as the prayer of the appellant to discharge him and the submissions
made by Shri Vikas Singh, learned Senior Advocate on merits are concerned, the law
on the scope at the stage of Sections 227/228 CrPC is required to be considered.

8.1. In N. Suresh Rajan [State of T.N. v. N. Suresh Rajan, (2014) 11 SCC 709 : (2014)
3 SCC (Cri) 529 : (2014) 2 SCC (L&S) 721] this Court had an occasion to consider in
detail the scope of the proceedings at the stage of framing of the charge under
Sections 227/228 CrPC. After considering earlier decisions of this Court on the point,
thereafter in paras 29 to 31 this Court has observed and held as under : (SCC pp.
721-23) "29. We have bestowed our consideration to the rival submissions and the
submissions made by Mr Ranjit Kumar commend us. True it is that at the time of
consideration of the applications for discharge, the court cannot act as a mouthpiece
of the prosecution or act as a post office and may sift evidence in order to find out
whether or not the allegations made are groundless so as to pass an order of
discharge. It is trite that at the stage of consideration of an application for discharge,
the court has to proceed with an assumption that the materials brought on record by
the prosecution are true and evaluate the said materials and documents with a view
to find out whether the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose the
existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. At this stage,
probative value of the materials has to be gone into and the court is not expected to
go deep into the matter and hold that the materials would not warrant a conviction.
In our opinion, what needs to be considered is whether there is a ground for
presuming that the offence has been committed and not whether a ground for
convicting the accused has been made out. To put it differently, if the court thinks
that the accused might have committed the offence on the basis of the materials on
record on its probative value, it can frame the charge; though for conviction, the court
has to come to the conclusion that the accused has committed the offence. The law
does not permit a mini trial at this stage.

30. Reference in this connection can be made to a recent decision of this Court
in Sheoraj Singh Ahlawat v. State of U.P. [Sheoraj Singh Ahlawat v. State of U.P.,
(2013) 11 SCC 476 : (2012) 4 SCC (Cri) 21] , in which, after analysing various
decisions on the point, this Court endorsed the following view taken in Onkar Nath
Mishra v. State (NCT of Delhi) [Onkar Nath Mishra v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2008) 2
SCC 561 : (2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 507] : (Sheoraj Singh Ahlawat case [Sheoraj Singh
Ahlawat v. State of U.P., (2013) 11 SCC 476 : (2012) 4 SCC (Cri) 21] , SCC p. 482, para
15) '15. ... "11. It is trite that at the stage of framing of charge the court is required to
evaluate the material and documents on record with a view to finding out if the facts
emerging therefrom, taken at their face value, disclosed the existence of all the

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

ingredients constituting the alleged offence. At that stage, the court is not expected to
go deep into the probative value of the material on record. What needs to be
considered is whether there is a ground for presuming that the offence has been
committed and not a ground for convicting the accused has been made out. At that
stage, even strong suspicion founded on material which leads the court to form a
presumptive opinion as to the existence of the factual ingredients constituting the
offence alleged would justify the framing of charge against the accused in respect of
the commission of that offence." (Onkar Nath case [Onkar Nath Mishra v. State (NCT
of Delhi), (2008) 2 SCC 561 : (2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 507] , SCC p. 565, para 11).'

31. Now reverting to the decisions of this Court in Sajjan Kumar [Sajjan
Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1371] and Dilawar Balu
Kurane [Dilawar Balu Kurane v. State of Maharashtra, (2002) 2 SCC 135 : 2002 SCC
(Cri) 310] , relied on by the respondents, we are of the opinion that they do not
advance their case. The aforesaid decisions consider the provision of Section 227 of
the Code and make it clear that at the stage of discharge the court cannot make a
roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as if it
was conducting a trial. It is worth mentioning that the Code contemplates discharge
of the accused by the Court of Session under Section 227 in a case triable by it; cases
instituted upon a police report are covered by Section 239 and cases instituted
otherwise than on a police report are dealt with in Section 245. From a reading of the
aforesaid sections it is evident that they contain somewhat different provisions with
regard to discharge of an accused:

31.1. Under Section 227 of the Code, the trial court is required to discharge the accused if it
'considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused'. However,
discharge under Section 239 can be ordered when 'the Magistrate considers the charge against the
accused to be groundless'. The power to discharge is exercisable under Section 245(1) when, 'the
Magistrate considers, for reasons to be recorded that no case against the accused has been made out
which, if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction'.

31.2. Sections 227 and 239 provide for discharge before the recording of evidence on the basis of the
police report, the documents sent along with it and examination of the accused after giving an
opportunity to the parties to be heard. However, the stage of discharge under Section 245, on the
other hand, is reached only after the evidence referred in Section 244 has been taken.

31.3. Thus, there is difference in the language employed in these provisions. But, in our opinion,
notwithstanding these differences, and whichever provision may be applicable, the court is required
at this stage to see that there is a prima facie case for proceeding against the accused. Reference in
this connection can be made to a judgment of this Court in R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay [R.S.
Nayak v. A.R. Antulay, (1986) 2 SCC 716 : 1986 SCC (Cri) 256] . The same reads as follows : (SCC pp.
755-56, para 43) '43. ... Notwithstanding this difference in the position there is no scope for doubt
that the stage at which the Magistrate is required to consider the question of framing of charge
under Section 245(1) is a preliminary one and the test of "prima facie" case has to be applied. In

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

spite of the difference in the language of the three sections, the legal position is that if the trial court
is satisfied that a prima facie case is made out, charge has to be framed.' "

(emphasis in original) 8.2. In the subsequent decision in S. Selvi [State v. S. Selvi,
(2018) 13 SCC 455 : (2018) 3 SCC (Cri) 710] this Court has summarised the principles
while framing of the charge at the stage of Sections 227/228 CrPC. This Court has
observed and held in paras 6 and 7 as under : (SCC pp. 458-59) "6. It is well settled
by this Court in a catena of judgments including Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar
Samal [Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 609]
, Dilawar Balu Kurane v. State of Maharashtra [Dilawar Balu Kurane v. State of
Maharashtra, (2002) 2 SCC 135 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 310] , Sajjan Kumar v. CBI [Sajjan
Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1371] , State v. A. Arun
Kumar [State v. A. Arun Kumar, (2015) 2 SCC 417 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 96 : (2015) 1
SCC (L&S) 505] , Sonu Gupta v. Deepak Gupta [Sonu Gupta v. Deepak Gupta, (2015)
3 SCC 424 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 265] , State of Orissa v. Debendra Nath Padhi [State of
Orissa v. Debendra Nath Padhi, (2003) 2 SCC 711 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 688] , Niranjan
Singh Karam Singh Punjabi v. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya [Niranjan Singh Karam Singh
Punjabi v. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya, (1990) 4 SCC 76 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 47] and Supt. &
Remembrancer of Legal Affairs v. Anil Kumar Bhunja [Supt. & Remembrancer of
Legal Affairs v. Anil Kumar Bhunja, (1979) 4 SCC 274 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 1038] that the
Judge while considering the question of framing charge under Section 227 of the
Code in sessions cases (which is akin to Section 239 CrPC pertaining to warrant
cases) has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited
purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been
made out; where the material placed before the court discloses grave suspicion
against the accused which has not been properly explained, the court will be fully
justified in framing the charge; by and large if two views are equally possible and the
Judge is satisfied that the evidence produced before him while giving rise to some
suspicion but not grave suspicion against the accused, he will be fully within his
rights to discharge the accused. The Judge cannot act merely as a post office or a
mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the
case, the total effect of the statements and the documents produced before the court,
any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This however does not mean
that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and
weigh the materials as if he was conducting a trial.

7. In Sajjan Kumar v. CBI [Sajjan Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368 : (2010) 3 SCC
(Cri) 1371] , this Court on consideration of the various decisions about the scope of
Sections 227 and 228 of the Code, laid down the following principles : (SCC pp.
376-77, para 21) '(i) The Judge while considering the question of framing the charges
under Section 227 CrPC has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the
accused has been made out. The test to determine prima facie case would depend
upon the facts of each case.

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

(ii) Where the materials placed before the court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained, the court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.

(iii) The court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution
but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the evidence
and the documents produced before the court, any basic infirmities, etc. However, at
this stage, there cannot be a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and
weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.

(iv) If on the basis of the material on record, the court could form an opinion that the
accused might have committed offence, it can frame the charge, though for conviction
the conclusion is required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has
committed the offence.

(v) At the time of framing of the charges, the probative value of the material on
record cannot be gone into but before framing a charge the court must apply its
judicial mind on the material placed on record and must be satisfied that the
commission of offence by the accused was possible.

(vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the court is required to evaluate the
material and documents on record with a view to find out if the facts emerging
therefrom taken at their face value disclose the existence of all the ingredients
constituting the alleged offence. For this limited purpose, sift the evidence as it
cannot be expected even at that initial stage to accept all that the prosecution states
as gospel truth even if it is opposed to common sense or the broad probabilities of the
case.

(vii) If two views are possible and one of them gives rise to suspicion only, as
distinguished from grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be empowered to discharge
the accused and at this stage, he is not to see whether the trial will end in conviction
or acquittal.' "

8.3. In Mauvin Godinho [Mauvin Godinho v. State of Goa, (2018) 3 SCC 358 : (2018) 2 SCC (Cri) 63
: (2018) 1 SCC (L&S) 591] this Court had an occasion to consider how to determine prima facie case
while framing the charge under Sections 227/228 CrPC. In the same decision this Court observed
and held that while considering the prima facie case at the stage of framing of the charge under
Section 227 CrPC there cannot be a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh
the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.

8.4. At this stage the decision of this Court in Stree Atyachar Virodhi Parishad [Stree Atyachar
Virodhi Parishad v. Dilip Nathumal Chordia, (1989) 1 SCC 715 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 285] is also required
to be referred to. In that aforesaid decision this Court had an occasion to consider the scope of
enquiry at the stage of deciding the matter under Sections 227/228 CrPC. In paras 11 to 14

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

observations of this Court in the aforesaid decision are as under : (SCC pp. 719-21) "11. Section 227
of the Code of Criminal Procedure having bearing on the contentions urged for the parties, provides:

'227. Discharge.--If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents
submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the
prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is no sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons
for so doing.'

12. Section 228 requires the Judge to frame charge if he considers that there is ground for
presuming that the accused has committed the offence. The interaction of these two sections has
already been the subject-matter of consideration by this Court. In State of Bihar v. Ramesh
Singh [State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh, (1977) 4 SCC 39 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 533] , Untwalia, J., while
explaining the scope of the said sections observed : [SCC pp. 41-42, para 4 : SCC (Cri) pp. 535-36 :
SCR p. 259] '4. ... Reading the two provisions together in juxtaposition, as they have got to be, it
would be clear that at the beginning and the initial stage of the trial the truth, veracity and effect of
the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged. Nor is any
weight to be attached to the probable defence of the accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that
stage of the trial to consider in any detail and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if
proved, would be incompatible with the innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and
judgment which is to be finally applied before recording a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of
the accused is not exactly to be applied at the stage of deciding the matter under Section 227 or
Section 228 of the Code. At that stage the court is not to see whether there is sufficient ground for
conviction of the accused or whether the trial is sure to end in his conviction. Strong suspicion
against the accused, if the matter remains in the region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof
of his guilt at the conclusion of the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which
leads the court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an
offence then it is not open to the court to say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused.'

13. In Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal [Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3
SCC 4 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 609] , Fazal Ali, J., summarised some of the principles : [SCC p. 9, para 10 :
SCC (Cri) pp. 613-14 : SCR pp. 234-35] '(1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing
the charges under Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence
for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused had been
made out.

(2) Where the materials placed before the court disclose grave suspicion against the accused which
has not been properly explained the court will be fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding
with the trial.

(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of each case and
it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large however if two views are
equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence produced before him while giving rise to

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

some suspicion but not grave suspicion against the accused, he will be fully within his right to
discharge the accused.

(4) That in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which under the
present Code is a senior and experienced court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of
the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the
evidence and the documents produced before the court, any basic infirmities appearing in the case
and so on. This however does not mean that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros
and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.'

14. These two decisions do not lay down different principles. Prafulla Kumar case [Union of
India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 609] has only reiterated what has
been stated in Ramesh Singh case [State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh, (1977) 4 SCC 39 : 1977 SCC (Cri)
533] . In fact, Section 227 itself contains enough guidelines as to the scope of enquiry for the
purpose of discharging an accused. It provides that 'the Judge shall discharge when he considers
that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused'. The "ground" in the context is
not a ground for conviction, but a ground for putting the accused on trial. It is in the trial, the guilt
or the innocence of the accused will be determined and not at the time of framing of charge. The
court, therefore, need not undertake an elaborate enquiry in sifting and weighing the material. Nor
is it necessary to delve deep into various aspects. All that the court has to consider is whether the
evidentiary material on record if generally accepted, would reasonably connect the accused with the
crime. No more need be enquired into."

8.5. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions and considering the scope of
enquiry at the stage of framing of the charge under Sections 227/228 CrPC, we are of the opinion
that the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant on merits, at
this stage, are not required to be considered. Whatever submissions are made by the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant are on merits are required to be dealt with and considered at an
appropriate stage during the course of the trial. Some of the submissions may be considered to be
the defence of the accused. Some of the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the appellant on the conduct of the victim/prosecutrix are required to be dealt with and
considered at an appropriate stage during the trial. The same are not required to be considered at
this stage of framing of the charge. On considering the material on record, we are of the opinion that
there is more than a prima facie case against the accused for which he is required to be tried. There
is sufficient ample material against the accused and therefore the learned trial court has rightly
framed the charge against the accused and the same is rightly confirmed by the High Court. No
interference of this Court is called for.

9. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present appeal fails and as a result the
appeal stands dismissed. Considering the fact that the allegations against the appellant of sexual
abuse are very serious and affecting the dignity of a woman and is the most morally and physically
reprehensible crime in a society, an assault on the mind and privacy of the victim and the trial for
such offences is required to be decided and disposed of at the earliest and considering the fact that
in the present case the learned trial court has framed the charge against the accused and the

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

incident is of 2013 and there is already a delay in concluding the trial because of the pending
proceedings, we direct the learned trial court to conclude the trial at the earliest within a period of
six months from the date of receipt of the order of this Court. All concerned are directed to
cooperate with the trial court in the earlier disposal of the trial and within the stipulated time
observed hereinabove."

31. In the case of State of Gujarat vs. Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao reported in 2023 SCC OnLine SC
1294, the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed as under:-

"10. It is settled principle of law that at the stage of considering an application for
discharge the court must proceed on an assumption that the material which has been
brought on record by the prosecution is true and evaluate said material in order to
determine whether the facts emerging from the material taken on its face value,
disclose the existence of the ingredients necessary of the offence alleged. This Court
in State of Tamil Nadu Vs. N. Suresh Rajan And Others (2014) 11 SCC 709 adverting
to the earlier propositions of law laid down on this subject has held:

"29. We have bestowed our consideration to the rival submissions and the
submissions made by Mr. Ranjit Kumar commend us. True it is that at the time of
consideration of the applications for 12 discharge, the court cannot act as a
mouthpiece of the prosecution or act as a post office and may sift evidence in order to
find out whether or not the allegations made are groundless so as to pass an order of
discharge. It is trite that at the stage of consideration of an application for discharge,
the court has to proceed with an assumption that the materials brought on record by
the prosecution are true and evaluate the said materials and documents with a view
to find out whether the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose the
existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. At this stage,
probative value of the materials has to be gone into and the court is not expected to
go deep into the matter and hold that the materials would not warrant a conviction.
In our opinion, what needs to be considered is whether there is a ground for
presuming that the offence has been committed and not whether a ground for
convicting the accused has been made out. To put it differently, if the court thinks
that the accused might have committed the offence on the basis of the materials on
record on its probative value, it can frame the charge; though for conviction, the court
has to come to the conclusion that the accused has committed the offence. The law
does not permit a mini trial at this stage."

11. The defence of the accused is not to be looked into at the stage when the accused seeks to be
discharged. The expression "the record of the case" used in Section 227 Cr.P.C. is to be understood
as the documents and articles, if any, produced by the prosecution. The Code does not give any right
to the accused to produce any document at the stage of framing of the charge. The submission of the
accused is to be confined to the material produced by the investigating agency.

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

12. The primary consideration at the stage of framing of charge is the test of existence of a
prima-facie case, and at this stage, the probative value of materials on record need not be gone into.
This Court by referring to its earlier decisions in the State of Maharashtra Vs. Som Nath Thapa
(1996) 4 SCC 659 and the State of MP Vs. Mohan Lal Soni (2000) 6 SCC 338 has held the nature of
evaluation to be made by the court at the stage of framing of the 14 charge is to test the existence of
prima-facie case. It is also held at the stage of framing of charge, the court has to form a
presumptive opinion to the existence of factual ingredients constituting the offence alleged and it is
not expected to go deep into probative value of the material on record and to check whether the
material on record would certainly lead to conviction at the conclusion of trial.

13. The power and jurisdiction of Higher Court under Section 397 Cr.P.C. which vests the court with
the power to call for and examine records of an inferior court is for the purposes of satisfying itself
as to the legality and regularities of any proceeding or order made in a case. The object of this
provision is to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law or the perversity which has
crept in such proceedings. It would be apposite to refer to the judgment of this court in Amit Kapoor
Vs. Ramesh 15 Chandra (2012) 9 SCC 460 where scope of Section 397 has been considered and
succinctly explained as under:

"12. Section 397 of the Code vests the court with the power to call for and examine the
records of an inferior court for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and
regularity of any proceedings or order made in a case. The object of this provision is
to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law. There has to be a
well-founded error and it may not be appropriate for the court to scrutinise the
orders, which upon the face of it bears a token of careful consideration and appear to
be in accordance with law. If one looks into the various judgments of this Court, it
emerges that the revisional jurisdiction can be invoked where the decisions under
challenge are grossly erroneous, there is no compliance with the provisions of law,
the finding recorded is based on no evidence, material evidence is ignored or judicial
discretion is exercised arbitrarily or perversely. These are not exhaustive classes, but
are merely indicative. Each case would have to be determined on its own merits.

13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional jurisdiction of the higher court
is a very limited one and cannot be exercised in a routine manner. One of the inbuilt
restrictions is that it should not be against an interim or interlocutory order. The
Court has to keep in mind that the exercise of revisional jurisdiction itself should not
lead to injustice ex facie. Where the Court is dealing with the question as to whether
the charge has been framed properly and in accordance with law in a given case, it 16
may be reluctant to interfere in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction unless the case
substantially falls within the categories aforestated. Even framing of charge is a much
advanced stage in the proceedings under the CrPC."

14. This Court in the aforesaid judgement has also laid down principles to be considered for exercise
of jurisdiction under Section 397 particularly in the context of prayer for quashing of charge framed
under Section 228 Cr.P.C. is sought for as under:

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

"27. Having discussed the scope of jurisdiction under these two provisions i.e. Section
397 and Section 482 of the Code and the fine line of jurisdictional distinction, now it
will be appropriate for us to enlist the principles with reference to which the courts
should exercise such jurisdiction. However, it is not only difficult but is inherently
impossible to state with precision such principles. At best and upon objective analysis
of various judgments of this Court, we are able to cull out some of the principles to be
considered for proper exercise of jurisdiction, particularly, with regard to quashing of
charge either in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 or Section 482 of the Code
or together, as the case may be:

27.1. Though there are no limits of the powers of the Court under Section 482 of the
Code but the 17 more the power, the more due care and caution is to be exercised in
invoking these powers. The power of quashing criminal proceedings, particularly, the
charge framed in terms of Section 228 of the Code should be exercised very sparingly
and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases.

27.2. The Court should apply the test as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as
made from the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith prima facie
establish the offence or not. If the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently
improbable that no prudent person can ever reach such a conclusion and where the
basic ingredients of a criminal offence are not satisfied then the Court may interfere.

27.3. The High Court should not unduly interfere. No meticulous examination of the
evidence is needed for considering whether the case would end in conviction or not at
the stage of framing of charge or quashing of charge.

27.9. Another very significant caution that the courts have to observe is that it cannot
examine the facts, evidence and materials on record to determine whether there is
sufficient material on the basis of which the case would end in a conviction; the court
is concerned primarily with the allegations taken as a whole whether they will
constitute an offence and, if so, is it an abuse of the process of court leading to
injustice.

27.13. Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution.
Where the offence is even broadly satisfied, the Court should be more inclined to
permit continuation 18 of prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial stage.
The Court is not expected to marshal the records with a view to decide admissibility
and reliability of the documents or records but is an opinion formed prima facie."

15. The revisional court cannot sit as an appellate court and start appreciating the evidence by
finding out inconsistency in the statement of witnesses and it is not legally permissible. The High
Courts ought to be cognizant of the fact that trial court was dealing with an application for
discharge."

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

32. In the case of Vishnu Kumar Shukla v. State of U.P., 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1582, the Hon'ble
Apex Court has observed as under:-

"15. Although the instant case pertains to Trial of Warrant-Cases by Magistrates and
is a case instituted on a police report, meaning Sections 239-2409, CrPC are relevant,
we also propose to glance at Section 24510, CrPC (concerning trial of warrant-cases
by Magistrates apropos cases instituted otherwise than on police report), as also
Sections 227-22811, CrPC, which pertain to Trial before a Court of Session.

16. The extent of scrutiny permissible when an application for discharge is being
considered has attracted this Court's attention on a number of occasions. It is
appropriate to take note of the leading precedents on the subject. Insofar as
Section 245, CrPC is concerned, the decision of this Court in Ajoy Kumar
Ghose v. State of Jharkhand, (2009) 14 SCC 115 is instructive:

'19. The essential difference of procedure in the trial of warrant case on the basis of a
police report and that instituted otherwise than on the police report is particularly
marked in Sections 238 and 239 CrPC on one side and Sections 244 and 245 CrPC on
the other. Under Section 238, when in a warrant case, instituted on a police report,
the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate, the Magistrate has to satisfy
himself that he has been supplied the necessary documents like the police report,
FIR, statements recorded under sub-section (3) of Section 161 CrPC of all the
witnesses proposed to be examined by the prosecution, as also the confessions and
statements recorded under Section 164 and any other documents which have been
forwarded by the prosecuting agency to the court.

20. After that, comes the stage of discharge, for which it is provided in
Section 239 CrPC that the Magistrate has to consider the police report and the
documents sent with it under Section 173 CrPC and if necessary, has to examine the
accused and has to hear the prosecution of the accused, and if on such examination
and hearing, the Magistrate considers the charge to be groundless, he would
discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing. The prosecution at that
stage is not required to lead evidence. If, on examination of the aforementioned
documents, he comes to the prima facie conclusion that there is a ground for
proceeding with the trial, he proceeds to frame the charge. For framing the charge, he
does not have to pass a separate order. It is then that the charge is framed under
Section 240 CrPC and the trial proceeds for recording the evidence. Thus, in such
trial prosecution has only one opportunity to lead evidence and that too comes only
after the charge is framed.

Xxx

22. In the warrant trial instituted otherwise than the police report, the complainant gets two
opportunities to lead evidence, firstly, before the charge is framed and secondly, after the framing of

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

the charge. Of course, under Section 245(2) CrPC, a Magistrate can discharge the accused at any
previous stage of the case, if he finds the charge to be groundless.

23. Essentially, the applicable sections are Sections 244 and 245 CrPC since this is a warrant trial
instituted otherwise than on police report. There had to be an opportunity for the prosecution to
lead evidence under Section 244(1) CrPC or to summon its witnesses under Section 244(2) CrPC.
This did not happen and instead, the accused proceeded to file an application under
Section 245(2) CrPC on the ground that the charge was groundless.

24. Now, there is a clear difference in Sections 245(1) and 245(2) of CrPC. Under Section 245(1), the
Magistrate has the advantage of the evidence led by the prosecution before him under Section 244
and he has to consider whether if the evidence remains unrebutted, the conviction of the accused
would be warranted. If there is no discernible incriminating material in the evidence, then the
Magistrate proceeds to discharge the accused under Section 245(1) CrPC.

25. The situation under Section 245(2) CrPC is, however, different. There, under subsection (2), the
Magistrate has the power of discharging the accused at any previous stage of the case i.e. even before
such evidence is led. However, for discharging an accused under Section 245(2) CrPC, the
Magistrate has to come to a finding that the charge is groundless. There is no question of any
consideration of evidence at that stage, because there is none. The Magistrate can take this decision
before the accused appears or is brought before the court or the evidence is led under
Section 244 CrPC. The words appearing in Section 245(2) CrPC "at any previous stage of the case",
clearly bring out this position.

Xxx

36. The Magistrate has the power to discharge the accused under Section 245(2) CrPC at any
previous stage i.e. before the evidence is recorded under Section 244(1) CrPC, which seems to be the
established law, particularly in view of the decision in Cricket Assn. of Bengal v. State of W.B. [(1971)
3 SCC 239 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 446], as also the subsequent decision of the Bombay High Court in Luis
de Piedade Lobo v. Mahadev Vishwanath Parulekar [1984 Cri LJ 513 (Bom)]. The same decision was
followed by Kerala High Court in Manmohan Malhotra v. P.M. Abdul Salam [1994 Cri LJ
1555 (Ker)] and Hon'ble Justice K.T. Thomas, as the learned Judge then was, accepted the
proposition that the Magistrate has the power under Section 245(2) CrPC to discharge the accused
at any previous stage. The Hon'ble Judge relied on a decision of the Madras High Court in Mohd.
Sheriff Sahib v. Abdul Karim Sahib [AIR 1928 Mad 129 (1)], as also the judgment of the Himachal
Pradesh High Court in Gopal Chauhan v. Satya [1979 Cri LJ 446 (HP)].

37. We are convinced that under Section 245(2) CrPC the Magistrate can discharge the accused at
any previous stage i.e. even before any evidence is recorded under Section 244(1) CrPC. In that view,
the accused could have made the application. It is obvious that the application has been rejected by
the Magistrate. So far, there is no difficulty.' (emphasis supplied)

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

17. Turning to Sections 239-240, CrPC, this Court held as under in Minakshi Bala v. Sudhir
Kumar, (1994) 4 SCC 142:

'6. Having regard to the fact that the offences, for which charge-sheet was submitted
in the instant case and cognizance taken, were triable as a warrant case the
Magistrate was to proceed in accordance with Sections 239 and 240 of the Code at
the time of framing of the charges. Under the above sections, the Magistrate is first
required to consider the police report and the documents sent with it under
Section 173 CrPC and examine the accused, if he thinks necessary, and give an
opportunity to the prosecution and the accused of being heard. If on such
consideration, examination and hearing the Magistrate finds the charge groundless
he has to discharge the accused in terms of Section 239 CrPC; conversely, if he finds
that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence triable
by him he has to frame a charge in terms of Section 240 CrPC.

7. If charges are framed in accordance with Section 240 CrPC on a finding that a
prima facie case has been made out -- as has been done in the instant case -- the
person arraigned may, if he feels aggrieved, invoke the revisional jurisdiction of the
High Court or the Sessions Judge to contend that the charge-sheet submitted under
Section 173 CrPC and documents sent with it did not disclose any ground to presume
that he had committed any offence for which he is charged and the revisional court if
so satisfied can quash the charges framed against him. To put it differently, once
charges are framed under Section 240 CrPC the High Court in its revisional
jurisdiction would not be justified in relying upon documents other than those
referred to in Sections 239 and 240 CrPC; nor would it be justified in invoking its
inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC to quash the same except in those rare
cases where forensic exigencies and formidable compulsions justify such a course.
We hasten to add even in such exceptional cases the High Court can look into only
those documents which are unimpeachable and can be legally translated into relevant
evidence.

8. Apart from the infirmity in the approach of the High Court in dealing with the
matter which we have already noticed, we further find that instead of adverting to
a n d c o n f i n i n g i t s a t t e n t i o n t o t h e d o c u m e n t s r e f e r r e d t o i n
Sections 239 and 240 CrPC the High Court has dealt with the rival contentions of the
parties raised through their respective affidavits at length and on a threadbare
discussion thereof passed the impugned order. The course so adopted cannot be
supported; firstly, because finding regarding commission of an offence cannot be
recorded on the basis of affidavit evidence and secondly, because at the stage of
framing of charge the Court cannot usurp the functions of a trial court to delve into
and decide upon the respective merits of the case.' (emphasis supplied)

18. With great respect, we express our reservations in fully acceding to what has been stated above.
If Paragraph 8 of Minakshi Bala (supra) is accepted as it is, the necessary concomitant would be that

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

despite examining the matter in detail, a Court would find its wings clipped to intercede. This would
amount to forcing a person to stand trial, even when the overwhelming material points to his/her
innocence. Obviously, the hands of a Court ought not to be tied down, and especially not by a higher
Court, and moreso not against liberty. Paragraph 7 of Minakshi Bala (supra) does enable examining
unimpeachable documents. We are conscious that Minakshi Bala (supra) has been followed in later
decisions by the Court. However, we have chosen to survey the precedents further, and then decide
on the road we wish to take13.

19. In Rumi Dhar v. State of West Bengal, (2009) 6 SCC 364, this Court held that the Judge
concerned with an application under Section 239, CrPC has to '... go into the details of the
allegations made against each of the accused persons so as to form an opinion as to whether any
case at all has been made out or not as a strong suspicion in regard thereto shall subserve the
requirements of law.'

20. In State of Tamil Nadu v. N Suresh Rajan, (2014) 11 SCC 709, it was observed notwithstanding
the difference in language of Sections 227 and 239, CrPC, the approach of the Court concerned is to
b e c o m m o n u n d e r b o t h p r o v i s i o n s . T h e p r i n c i p l e s h o l d i n g t h e f i e l d u n d e r
Sections 227 and 228, CrPC are well-settled, courtesy, inter alia, State of Bihar v. Ramesh
Singh, (1977) 4 SCC 39; Union of India v. Prafulla K Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4; Stree Atyachar Virodhi
Parishad v. Dilip N Chordia, (1989) 1 SCC 715; Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi v. Jitendra B
Bijjaya, (1990) 4 SCC 76; Dilawar B Kurane v. State of Maharashtra, (2002) 2 SCC 135; Chitresh K
Chopra v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi), (2009) 16 SCC 605; Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh
Chander, (2012) 9 SCC 460; Dinesh Tiwari v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2014) 13 SCC 137; Dipakbhai
Jagdishchandra Patel v. State of Gujarat, (2019) 16 SCC 547; and State (NCT of Delhi) v. Shiv
Charan Bansal, (2020) 2 SCC 290. We need only refer to some, starting with Prafulla K
Samal (supra), where, after considering Ramesh Singh (supra), K P Raghavan v. M H Abbas, AIR
1967 SC 740 and Almohan Das v. State of West Bengal, (1969) 2 SCR 520, it was laid down as under:

'10. Thus, on a consideration of the authorities mentioned above, the following
principles emerge:

(1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under
Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the
accused has been made out.

(2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained the Court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.

(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of
each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large
however if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

against the accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused.

(4) That in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which
under the present Code is a senior and experienced court cannot act merely as a Post
Office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities
of the case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced before the
Court, any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This however does not
mean that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the
matter and weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.' (emphasis supplied)

21. In Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi (supra), this Court was alive to reality, stating that '... it
cannot be expected even at the initial stage to accept all that the prosecution states as gospel truth
even if it is opposed to common sense or the broad probabilities of the case.' If a view gives rise to
suspicion, as opposed to grave suspicion, the Court concerned is empowered to discharge the
accused, as pointed out in Sajjan Kumar v. Central Bureau of Investigation, (2010) 9 SCC 368. The
Court, in Dinesh Tiwari (supra) had reasoned that if the Court concerned opines that there is ground
to presume the accused has committed an offence, it is competent to frame a charge even if such
offence is not mentioned in the Charge Sheet. As to what is 'strong suspicion', reference
to Dipakbhai Jagdishchandra Patel (supra) is warranted, where it was explained that it is '... the
suspicion which is premised on some material which commends itself to the court as sufficient to
entertain the prima facie view that the accused has committed the offence.'

22. In a recent judgment viz. State of Gujarat v. Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao, 2023 INSC 894, this
Court held:

'7. It is trite law that application of judicial mind being necessary to determine
whether a case has been made out by the prosecution for proceeding with trial and it
would not be necessary to dwell into the pros and cons of the matter by examining
the defence of the accused when an application for discharge is filed. At that stage,
the trial judge has to merely examine the evidence placed by the prosecution in order
to determine whether or not the grounds are sufficient to proceed against the accused
on basis of charge sheet material. The nature of the evidence recorded or collected by
the investigating agency or the documents produced in which prima facie it reveals
that there are suspicious circumstances against the accused, so as to frame a charge
would suffice and such material would be taken into account for the purposes of
framing the charge. If there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused
necessarily, the accused would be discharged, but if the court is of the opinion, after
such consideration of the material there are grounds for presuming that accused has
committed the offence which is triable, then necessarily charge has to be framed.

8. At the time of framing of the charge and taking cognizance the accused has no right
to produce any material and call upon the court to examine the same. No provision in
the Code grants any right to the accused to file any material or document at the stage
of framing of charge. The trial court has to apply its judicial mind to the facts of the

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

case as may be necessary to determine whether a case has been made out by the
prosecution for trial on the basis of charge-sheet material only.

9. If the accused is able to demonstrate from the charge-sheet material at the stage of
framing the charge which might drastically affect the very sustainability of the case, it
is unfair to suggest that such material should not be considered or ignored by the
court at that stage. The main intention of granting a chance to the accused of making
submissions as envisaged under Section 227 of the Cr. P.C. is to assist the court to
determine whether it is required to proceed to conduct the trial. Nothing in the Code
limits the ambit of such hearing, to oral hearing and oral arguments only and
therefore, the trial court can consider the material produced by the accused before
the I.O.

10. It is settled principle of law that at the stage of considering an application for
discharge the court must proceed on an assumption that the material which has been
brought on record by the prosecution is true and evaluate said material in order to
determine whether the facts emerging from the material taken on its face value,
disclose the existence of the ingredients necessary of the offence alleged. ...

xxx

11. The defence of the accused is not to be looked into at the stage when the accused seeks to be
discharged. The expression "the record of the case" used in Section 227 Cr. P.C. is to be understood
as the documents and articles, if any, produced by the prosecution. The Code does not give any right
to the accused to produce any document at the stage of framing of the charge. The submission of the
accused is to be confined to the material produced by the investigating agency.

12. The primary consideration at the stage of framing of charge is the test of existence of a
prima-facie case, and at this stage, the probative value of materials on record need not be gone
into. This Court by referring to its earlier decisions in the State of Maharashtra v. Som Nath
Thapa, (1996) 4 SCC 659 and the State of MP v. Mohan Lal Soni, (2000) 6 SCC 338 has held the
nature of evaluation to be made by the court at the stage of framing of the charge is to test the
existence of prima-facie case. It is also held at the stage of framing of charge, the court has to form a
presumptive opinion to the existence of factual ingredients constituting the offence alleged and it is
not expected to go deep into probative value of the material on record and to check whether the
material on record would certainly lead to conviction at the conclusion of trial.' (emphasis supplied)

23. On a careful conspectus of the legal spectrum, juxtaposed with our view on the facts and merits
expressed hereinbefore, we are satisfied that there is no suspicion, much less strong or grave
suspicion that the appellants are guilty of the offence alleged. It would be unjustified to make the
appellants face a full-fledged criminal trial in this backdrop. In an appeal dealing with the refusal of
the High Court to quash an FIR under Section 482, CrPC albeit, this Court, while setting aside the
judgment impugned therein and quashing that FIR, took the view that '...the Appellants are to be
protected against vexatious and unwarranted criminal prosecution, and from unnecessarily being

Yogendra Singh Verma Alias Yogendra ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 22 August, 2025

put through the rigours of an eventual trial. The protection against vexatious and unwanted
prosecution and from being unnecessarily dragged through a trial by melting a criminal proceeding
into oblivion, either through quashing a FIR/Complaint or by allowing an appeal against an order
rejecting discharge or by any other legally permissible route, as the circumstances may be, in the
deserving case, is a duty cast on the High Courts. The High Court should have intervened and
discharged the appellants. But this Court will intervene, being the sentinel on the qui vive."

33. Taking note of the aforesaid facts of the case including statement(s) on record of injured person,
namely, Ram Vilas Verma and Smt. Sushila Verma as also the pronouncements related to dealing
with the statement of an injured as also with the application seeking discharge, referred above, and
also the statement of Dr. Alankar Kumar Gupta and also the case summary of injured/Ram Vilas
Verma, at this stage, it cannot be said that offence under Section 307 I.P.C. against the revisionist is
not made out and therefore this Court is of the view that while passing the order dated 24.07.2025
the court dealing with case has not committed any illegality as the same has been passed after taking
note of the facts and evidence collected during investigation and being so no interference is required
in this order.

34. For the reasons aforesaid, this revision has no force. Accordingly, the present revision is
dismissed. Cost made easy."

5. The case of the present revisionist is similar to the revisionist of Criminal Revision No. 896 of
2025 and therefore, this Court is not inclined to take different view. Accordingly, the present
revision is also dismissed. Cost made easy.

Order date: - 22.08.2025 Jyoti/-